0 - After the bullet shells get counted, the blood dries and the votive candles burn out, people peer down from   windows and see crime scenes gone cold: a band of yellow police tape blowing in the breeze. The South Bronx, just across the Harlem River from Manhattan and once shorthand for urban dysfunction, still suffers violence at levels long ago slashed in many other parts of New York City. And yet the city’s efforts to fight it remain splintered, underfunded and burdened by scandal. In the 40th Precinct, at the southern tip of the Bronx, as in other poor, minority neighborhoods across the country, people long hounded for   infractions are crying out for more protection against grievous injury or death. By September, four of every five shootings in the precinct this year were unsolved. Out of the city’s 77 precincts, the 40th has the highest murder rate but the fewest detectives per violent crime, reflecting disparities in staffing that hit hardest in some neighborhoods outside Manhattan, according to a New York Times analysis of Police Department data. Investigators in the precinct are saddled with twice the number of cases the department recommends, even as their bosses are called to Police Headquarters to answer for the sharpest crime rise in the city this year. And across the Bronx, investigative resources are squeezed. It has the highest   rate of the city’s five boroughs but the thinnest detective staffing. Nine of the 14   precinct detective squads for violent crime in the city are there. The borough’s robbery squad is smaller than Manhattan’s, even though the Bronx has had 1, 300 more cases this year. And its homicide squad has one detective for every four murders, compared with one detective for roughly every two murders in Upper Manhattan and more than one detective per murder in Lower Manhattan. In   lobbies and   family apartments, outside methadone clinics and art studios, people take note of the inequity. They hear police commanders explain that they lack the resources to place a floodlight on a dangerous block or to post officers at a   corner. They watch witnesses cower behind   doors, more fearful of a gunman’s crew than confident in the Police Department’s ability to protect them. So though people see a lot, they rarely testify. And in the South Bronx, as in so many predominantly black and Hispanic neighborhoods like it in the United States, the contract between the police and the community is in tatters. Some people have stories of crime reports that were ignored, or 911 calls that went unanswered for hours. Others tell of a 911 call for help ending in the caller’s arrest, or of a minor charge leading to 12 hours in a fetid holding cell. This is the paradox of policing in the 40th Precinct. Its neighborhoods have historically been prime targets for aggressive tactics, like    that are designed to ward off disorder. But precinct detectives there have less time than anywhere else in the city to answer for the blood spilled in violent crimes. Gola White, who was beside her daughter when she was shot and killed in a playground this summer, four years after her son was gunned down in the same housing project, ticked off the public safety resources that she said were scant in Bronx neighborhoods like hers: security cameras, lights, locks, investigating police officers. “Here, we have nothing,” she said. When it comes to “  families,” she said, the authorities “don’t really care as much. That’s how I feel. ” The Times has been documenting the murders logged this year in the 40th Precinct, one of a handful of neighborhoods where deadly violence remains a problem in an era of   crime in New York City. The homicides  —   14 in the precinct this year, up from nine in 2015  —   strain detectives, and when they go unsolved, as half of them have this year, some look to take the law into their own hands. From hundreds of conversations with grieving relatives and friends, witnesses and police officers, the social forces that flare into murder in a place like the 40th Precinct become clearer: merciless gang codes, mental illness, drugs and long memories of feuds that simmered out of officers’ view. The reasons some murders will never be solved also emerge: paralyzing fear of retribution, victims carrying secrets to their graves and relentless casework that forces detectives to move on in hopes that a break will come later. Frustrations build on all sides. Detectives’ phones rarely ring with tips, and officers grow embittered with witnesses who will not cooperate. In the meantime, a victim’s friends conduct their own investigations, and talk of grabbing a stash gun from a wheel well or a mother’s apartment when they find their suspect. In the chasm between the police and the community, gangs and gun violence flourish. Parents try to protect their families from drug crews’ threats, and officers work to overcome the residue of years of mistrust and understaffing in communities where they still go racing from one 911 call to the next. The streets around St. Mary’s Park were the scene of two fatal shootings logged in the 40th Precinct this year. Both are unsolved. James Fernandez heard talk of the murders through the door of his   apartment on East 146th Street in a     the Betances Houses. He lived at the end of a long hallway strewn with hypodermic needles, empty dope bags and discarded Hennessy bottles. A   young men who spoke of being in a subset of the Bloods gang had made it their drug market, slinging marijuana and cocaine to regulars, flashing firearms and blowing smoke into the Fernandez apartment. When Mr. Fernandez, 40, asked the young men to move, they answered by busting up his car. This kind of crime, an anachronism in much of New York, still rattles the 40th Precinct, even though murders there have fallen to 14 this year from 83 in 1991. It has more major felony crimes per resident than any other residential district in the city. It is also one of the poorest communities in the country, and many young men find their way into underground markets. Mr. Fernandez was not one to shrink from the threats. When he was growing up on the Lower East Side, he rode his bicycle around to the customers of the drug dealers he worked for and collected payments in a backpack. After leaving that life, he got a tech maintenance job and, three years ago, moved into the Betances Houses with his wife and daughter, now 11. He had two choices to get help with the drug crew: call the police for help and risk being labeled a snitch, or call his old Lower East Side bosses for muscle and risk violence. He chose the police. Again and again, he walked into a local substation, Police Service Area 7, and asked for protection. His daughter was using an inhaler to relieve coughs from the marijuana smoke. Mr. Fernandez and his wife got terrible headaches. “There’s a lot of killers here, and we are going to kill you,” a sergeant’s police report quoted a    telling Mr. Fernandez in August 2015. A second report filed the same day said a    warned him, “I’m going to shoot through your window. ” Mr. Fernandez told the police both the teenagers’ names, which appear in the reports, and then went home. He said one of their friends had seen him walk into the substation, and they tried to intimidate him out of filing another report. Three days later, the same    propped his bike on their door, “then said if I was to open the door and say something, they would body slam me,” Mr. Fernandez’s wife, Maria Fernandez, wrote on slips of paper she used to document the hallway ruckus and the inadequate police response. The boys made comments about how easy a target she was and about how they would have to “slap” her if she opened the door while they made a drug sale, and they threatened to beat the Fernandez family because “they are the ones snitching,” her notes say. But another   complaint at the substation, 10 days after the first, brought no relief. A week later, feeling desperate, Ms. Fernandez tried calling: first to the substation, at 8:50 p. m. when one of the boys blew weed smoke at her door and made a   threat to attack her, and then to 911 at 10:36 p. m. The police never came, she wrote in her notes. She tried the 40th Precinct station house next, but officers at the desk left her standing in the public waiting area for a   she said, making her fear being seen again. Officers put her in worse danger some months later, she said, when they came to her door and announced in front of the teenagers that they were there on a complaint about drug activity. Mr. Fernandez started doing the work that he said the police had failed to do. He wired a camera into his peephole to record the drugs and guns. The footage hark back to the New York of the 1980s, still very much present to some of the precinct’s residents. Around 6:30 each morning, Sgt. Michael J. LoPuzzo walks through the tall wooden doors of the 40th Precinct station house. The cases that land on his metal desk  —   dead bodies with no known cause, strip club brawls, shooting victims hobbling into the hospital themselves  —   bring resistance at every turn, reminding him of an earlier era in the city’s   campaign. “I haven’t got one single phone call that’s putting me in the right direction here,” said Sergeant LoPuzzo, the head of the precinct’s detective squad, one day this summer as he worked on an answer to an email inquiry from a murder victim’s aunt about why the killer had not been caught. “And people just don’t understand that. ” Often it is detectives who most feel the effects of people turning on the police. Witnesses shout them away from their doors just so neighbors know they refuse to talk. Of the 184 people who were shot and wounded in the Bronx through early September, more than a third  —   66 victims  —   refused to cooperate. Over the same period in the 40th Precinct, squad detectives closed three of 17 nonfatal shootings, and 72 of 343 robbery cases. Part of the resistance stems from   preventive policing tactics, like    that were a hallmark of the     style under former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and his police commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly. Near the height of the    strategy, in 2012, the 40th Precinct had the   stops in the city, the   stops in which officers used force and the most frisks. Of 18, 276 stops that year, 15, 521 were of people who had done nothing criminal. The precinct was also one of the   areas that the department flooded with its newest officers. At roll calls, they were pressured to generate numbers: write tickets and make arrests. They had no choice but to give a summons to a young man playing in a park after dark, even if the officers had done the same growing up in the same neighborhood. “I need to bring something in today to justify my existence,” Officer Argenis Rosado, who joined the precinct in 2010, said in an interview at the station house. “So now you’re in a small area, and day after day you’re hammering the same community. Of course that community’s eventually going to turn on you. ” The pressure warped the way officers and residents saw each other. Rookies had to ignore why someone might be drinking outside or sitting on a stoop. “Some of the cops that came out at that time probably viewed the community differently, too,” said Hector Espada, a   veteran of the precinct. “Not because they wanted to, but because they had to. Because some way or somehow, you can’t give someone a $115 summons and feel like you guys could still have a civil conversation after that. ” Morale wilted in the aged station house on Alexander Avenue, in Mott Haven. Officers felt pressure to downgrade crime complaints to make them appear less serious. Several said in interviews that they had overlooked crime reports from immigrants because they were seen as unlikely to complain, and watched supervisors badger victims into repeating their stories in hopes that they would drop their complaints. The practice of downgrading complaints resulted in the disciplining of 19 officers in the precinct last year, one in a string of scandals that has left officers there feeling overscrutinized for problems that also existed elsewhere. Four commanders in the precinct were sent packing in five years, one of them after officers were found to be “ticket fixing,” or forgiving parking tickets for friends, and another after he was recorded giving guidance on whom to stop and frisk: black boys and men, ages 14 to 21. Some officers fled to other commands. Others became reluctant to take assignments in proactive policing units, like   that put them in   situations on the street. “Whenever I walked through the doors of the precinct, to me, it seemed like a black cloud,” said Russell Lewis, a    of the 40th. “It was like a heaviness. When you walked in, all you wanted to do was do your 8 hours 35 minutes and go home, because you didn’t want to get caught up in anything. ” The precinct covers only about two square miles, but the more than a dozen housing projects there mean that it overflows with people. Methadone clinics draw addicts from around the city.   lofts on the southern edge of the precinct presage a wave of gentrification. Even as the Police Department has hired 1, 300 more officers for neighborhood policing and counterterrorism, officers in the 40th Precinct said they could still rush to 25 911 calls during a shift  —   a number unchanged from what the new police commissioner, James P. O’Neill, said he was handling in a similar South Bronx precinct 15 years ago. Several dozen calls at a time can be waiting for a response. Residents know that if you want the police for a domestic problem, it helps to hint that there is a weapon. Last year, the precinct drew the   number of civilian complaints for officer misconduct in the city, and the most lawsuits stemming from police actions. The precinct is trying to improve morale under a new commanding officer, Deputy Inspector Brian Hennessy. A cadre of what the department calls neighborhood coordination officers has been on patrol since last January, part of a citywide effort under Mr. O’Neill and Mayor Bill de Blasio to bring back the beat cop, unencumbered by chasing every last 911 call, who can listen to people’s concerns and help with investigations. The precinct has made among the most gun arrests in the city, and officers said they now had more discretion to resolve encounters without a summons or an arrest. At one corner near a school, on Courtlandt Avenue and East 151st Street, that has long spawned complaints about gunfire and fights, Inspector Hennessy and some of his officers painted over graffiti and swept up drug paraphernalia this summer. People said it was the first answer to their complaints in years. But the inspector acknowledged that the residue of   policing lingers. “That perception really sticks,” he said. The workload in the 40th Precinct is startling and reveals a gap in how detective squads are equipped to answer violent crime in Manhattan compared with the Bronx, Brooklyn and Queens. Three of the precinct’s 16 detectives are carrying more than 400 cases each this year, and many others have loads in the high 300s, even though the department advises 150 in violent precincts. When they are assigned a homicide, they typically have four days to investigate before dealing with other cases. Quieter precincts can give detectives a month with little distraction to investigate a murder. Detectives in the 40th Precinct have each handled an average of 79 violent felonies this year through    —   murders, rapes, felony assaults and robberies. By contrast, a detective in the precinct on the southern end of Staten Island carries nine such cases a detective in the precinct patrolling Union Square and Gramercy Park handles 16 and a detective in the precinct for most of Washington Heights handles 32, the citywide median. Last year, the 40th was the    for violent crime, with 65 cases per detective. In the Bronx as a whole, a precinct detective has carried an average of 58 violent felonies this year, compared with 27 in Manhattan, 37 in Brooklyn, 38 in Queens and 25 on Staten Island. Rape cases and robbery patterns are later sent to more specialized units, but precinct detectives do extensive initial work to interview victims, write reports and process evidence. Precincts in much of Manhattan, which are whiter and wealthier than the South Bronx, often have more property felonies, like stolen laptops or credit cards, and the police say those can be complex. But even accounting for those crimes, the 40th Precinct has some of the heaviest caseloads of overall crime per detective in the city. Michael Palladino, the head of the Detectives’ Endowment Association and a former Bronx officer, said staffing disparities affected the department’s efforts to build trust in communities like the South Bronx. Witnesses make a calculation, he said: “If I cooperate with the detectives, there’s so much work, there’s so few of them there, they won’t even get the chance to protect me, or they’ll be there too late when the retaliation comes. ” Sergeant LoPuzzo, who turned down a more prestigious post to stay in the 40th Precinct, said that his squad worked tirelessly to handle cases with the people he had, and that while every squad wanted more detectives, staffing needs for counterterrorism units and task forces had created new deployment challenges across the department. “We fight with the army we have, not the army we wish we had,” he said. Details of how the Police Department assigns its 36, 000 officers are closely held and constantly in flux, and the public has minimal information on how personnel are allocated. Presented with The Times’s analysis of confidential staffing data, the department’s chief of detectives, Robert K. Boyce, vowed to send more detectives to the 40th Precinct and said the department would reassess its deployment more broadly in troubled precincts. He said a recent decision to bring gang, narcotics and vice detectives under his command made it easier to shift personnel. Chief Boyce said the burdens on detectives went beyond felony crimes to include   and   cases. And he noted the support that precinct squads got from centralized units focusing on robberies, gangs or grand larcenies, for example. Major crime keeps pounding the 40th Precinct, at rates that in 2015 were only a tenth of a percent lower than in 2001, even as citywide crime dropped by more than a third over the same period. But the precinct’s detective squad shrank by about eight investigators during those years, according to staffing data obtained from the City Council through a Freedom of Information Law request. The squad covering Union Square and Gramercy Park, where crime dropped by a third over that period, grew by about 11 investigators. (The 40th Precinct was given an additional detective and four   investigators this summer, when it was already missing three detectives for illness or other reasons.) Retired detectives are skeptical that community relations alone can drive down crime in the city’s last “” the busiest precincts. Rather, they say, the Police Department should be dedicating more resources to providing the same sort of robust investigative response that seems standard in Manhattan. “Any crime in Manhattan has to be solved,” said Howard Landesberg, who was a 40th Precinct detective in the late 1980s. “The outer boroughs are, like, forgotten. ” Retired detectives said that understaffing made it harder to solve crimes in the Bronx, Brooklyn and Queens, where the higher prevalence of gang and drug killings already saddled investigators with cases in which people were not inclined to cooperate. Through   detectives had closed 67 percent of homicides in Manhattan and 76 percent of those in Staten Island this year, compared with 54 percent of those in the Bronx, 42 percent of those in Queens and 31 percent of those in Brooklyn. Of last year’s homicides, detectives cleared 71 percent in Manhattan, 63 percent in the Bronx, 62 percent in Queens, 57 percent in Staten Island and 31 percent in Brooklyn. “It’s the culture of the Police Department that they worry about Manhattan,” said Joseph L. Giacalone, a former sergeant in the Bronx Cold Case Squad, in part “because that’s where the money is. ” He added: “When de Blasio came in, he talked about the tale of two cities. And then he’s done the complete opposite of what he said. It’s just business as usual. ” The Bronx’s struggles extend into prosecutions. In each of the last five years, prosecutors in the Bronx have declined to prosecute violent felony cases more than anywhere else in the city. And the rate of conviction in the Bronx is routinely the lowest in the city as well, but has ticked up this year to surpass Brooklyn’s rate through November as Bronx prosecutors work to streamline cases. Some cases have become even more difficult to win because of the   problem in the 40th Precinct, which has allowed defense lawyers to attack the credibility of officers who were implicated, said Patrice O’Shaughnessy, a spokeswoman for the Bronx District Attorney’s office. The district attorney, Darcel D. Clark, elected in 2015, said in a statement, “I was a judge here in the Bronx, and I heard from jurors that they can’t be impartial because they don’t trust the police. ” Against that tide of mistrust, Sergeant LoPuzzo’s detectives work 36 hours straight on some fresh cases. They buy Chinese takeout with their own money for a murder suspect. They carry surveillance videos home in hopes that their personal computers may enhance them better than a squad computer. They buy an urn for a homeless mother who has her murdered son’s ashes in a box. In the months after a killing, they can seem like the only people in this glittering city who are paying attention to the 40th Precinct’s homicide victims. Newly fatherless children go back to school without a therapist’s help. Victims’ families wander confused through a courthouse and nearly miss an appearance. Newspapers largely ignore killings of people with criminal pasts, pushing them down the priority lists of the   chiefs at Police Headquarters. In a stuffy   squad room, the detectives of the 40th Precinct grapple with an inheritance of government neglect. They meet mothers who believe their sons might never have been murdered had a city guidance counselor listened to pleas to help them stay enrolled, or had a city housing worker fixed the locks or lights on a building. And the detectives work alongside a vicious system on the streets for punishing police cooperators. Young men scan court paperwork in prison, looking for the names of people who turned on them. One murder victim in the precinct this year was cast out of his crew after he avoided being arrested with them in a gang takedown some believed he was cooperating. A longtime 40th Precinct detective, Jeff Meenagh, said a witness in a homicide case was going to testify until he went back to his neighborhood and was told that anyone who testified would “get what you deserve. ” The allies Sergeant LoPuzzo makes are friendly only for so long. He helped clear a woman’s son of a robbery charge by locating surveillance video that proved he was not the robber. The mother started calling with tips under a code name  —   about a gun under a car, for example. But she always refused to testify. And she cut ties this year after Sergeant LoPuzzo arrested her son in the stabbing of two people and her   in a shooting. New York City owns East 146th Street and the   buildings on each side. But James Fernandez, in the Betances Houses, said the reality on the ground was different: The drug boss ran the block. By October, Mr. Fernandez was increasingly afraid  —   and fed up. Mr. Fernandez and his wife went so far as to give officers keys to the building door, so they could get in whenever they wanted, showed them the videos and offered them   access to his camera so they could see what was happening in the hallway. A couple of officers said they needed a supervisor’s permission to do more. Others answered that the young men were only making threats. Officers occasionally stopped outside their building, causing the young men to scatter, but did not come inside, Mr. Fernandez said. The menacing worsened. Mr. Fernandez’s daughter was harassed as she arrived home from school. She grew more and more distressed, and her parents had her start seeing a therapist. Mr. Fernandez made several complaints at the office of the borough president, Ruben Diaz Jr. and visited a victim’s advocate in the district attorney’s office. On Oct. 20, 2015, he sent an online note to the police commissioner’s office. “We went to all proper channels for help,” the note said. “Both precincts failed us, except 2 officers who helped us, but their hands are tied. No one else to turn to. I have months of video of multiple crimes taking place and we are in extreme danger. ” “40th and PSA 7 won’t do anything,” he wrote, referring to the local substation. “Please we need to speak to some one with authority. ” The local substation commander, Deputy Inspector Jerry O’Sullivan, and the Bronx narcotics unit were alerted to the complaints. But Mr. Fernandez said he never heard from them. So he relied on his own street instincts to protect his family. He made pleas to a man he thought was employing the dealers in the hallway. The activity quieted briefly, but it returned after the young men rented a room in a woman’s apartment upstairs. Mr. Fernandez approached a different man who he learned was the boss of the operation. The man agreed to ask the dealers to calm down. He even hired a drug customer to sweep the hallway, Mr. Fernandez said. But two weeks later, the dealing and the harassment resumed. So he went to his old Lower East Side bosses, who hired men to trail his wife and daughter on their way out of the building and make sure they made it safely to school. At other times they sat outside the Betances Houses. He also bought two bulletproof vests, for about $700 each. He could not find one small enough for his daughter. “I have no faith in the City of New York, I have no faith in the police, I have no faith in the politicians,” Mr. Fernandez said. “The only thing I know for sure: God, if we’re in a situation again, I will be left to defend my family. ” Paying such close attention to what was happening in the hallway, Mr. Fernandez said he learned some details about two recent homicides that the 40th Precinct was investigating. But because his calls for help were going nowhere, he said he decided not to put himself in greater risk by talking: He would not tell the police what he had learned. “I’m bending over backward, and nobody’s not even doing anything,” he said. “Why am I going to help you, if you ain’t going to help me?” By last January, a new neighborhood coordination officer was working with residents of the Betances Houses, and ended up with the most arrests in his housing command, Inspector O’Sullivan said. Chief Boyce said that the silos in which gang and narcotics detectives used to work made responding to complaints more difficult, but that the recent restructuring would remove those obstacles. “No one should live like Mr. Fernandez lived, with people dealing drugs outside of his apartment,” he said. Mr. Fernandez’s complaints did not spur any arrests, but two men from the hallway were caught separately this year in shootings. One of them, whom Mr. Fernandez named in a police report, was charged this summer with hitting an officer with a metal folding chair and firing three gunshots into a crowd, court papers say. He is being held on Rikers Island on an attempted murder charge. That was too late for Mr. Fernandez. By May, he had moved his family away.

0 - Canada, our No. 1 pick for this year’s 52 Places to Go list, spans millions of square miles. It also contains multitudes, not just of people and locations, but of memories. We asked five Canadian authors to reflect on places that have lodged in their psyches. My mother always kept a bright yellow hard hat in her car, an unexpected accessory for a petite Hong Kong immigrant in her  . She was the senior purchaser for a British Columbia forestry company that, in lean years, laid off everyone in her department except her. (More’s the pity she dreamed of early retirement.) In the meantime, she shuttled between the province’s pulp and paper mills, doing the job of six people, negotiating contracts for hotels, log loaders, harvesters and more. One year, when I was 25, I finally said yes to her persistent invitations to tag along. She wanted me to meet the men and women who earned their living in the mill towns, and who called her by her English name, Matilda. We set out in her car, exploring the    of Vancouver Island, heading for the northern tip, Port Hardy. This would turn out to be the last trip we took together. I remember the wet October chill eagles descending over corridors of evergreens a seemingly endless highway. At twilight, the world took on the shifting depths of an Emily Carr painting. I had to put up with my mother’s terrible driving, and her devotion to Celine Dion. She had to put up with my moods. I was going through a breakup and had decided that, in order to strengthen my moral fiber, I should camp, alone, for three days in the woods. I instructed my mother to drop me off at my campsite, work for a few days in Port Hardy, and then pick me up again. Port Hardy is a microcosm of Canada: a   town with a complex human and environmental history. The archaeological site of the island’s oldest known human habitation (circa 5850 B. C.) the area is the place of origin for the Kwakiutl peoples. The land of the Kwakiutl, whose name translates to “smoke of the world,” was taken into ownership  —   both private and national  —   by gunpoint, dishonored treaties and restrictive and discriminatory laws. The scramble for artifacts and the theft of Kwakiutl art  —   work that was celebrated by Claude   as among the most sophisticated in the world  —   has meant that much of the community’s historical work is housed in museums elsewhere. After 1849, the Kwakiutl population was decimated, but it survives. In 2013, British Columbia was found to have once again breached the Kwakiutl’s 1851 Treaty rights. This is not a history I learned in school. Alone in the woods, I pitched my tent. The dark fell suddenly. I made it five hours before calling my mom, telling her I was afraid, and asking her to come get me. That night, we shared a bed in a small lodging provided by her company. I smelled of the fire I had briefly managed to start. It felt good to lie beside my mother in a place that was complex and old. A little over a year later, my mother died suddenly in a town where she was working, much like this one, on a November night when her heart gave out. It was her   two kind forestry men who, worried about my mother, entered her hotel room in the morning, to find her gone. So peaceful, they told us, as if she were only sleeping. Fourteen years later, I understand better how the smoke of the world is never still. Many of the mills my mother visited have closed, jobs have been lost, and, as of a decade ago, a staggering 75 percent of Vancouver Island’s productive   forest has been logged. It is a place that will tell us much about the balance between jobs and environmental stewardship, about our respect for First Nations treaty rights and our obligations to the land. This is the Canada still to come. Madeleine Thien is the author of “Do Not Say We Have Nothing. ” Grindstone Island is a   dot of green leaves and Victorian gingerbread structures in the middle of Big Rideau Lake, halfway between Kingston and Ottawa.   in the 19th century to make way for its eponymous grindstone quarry, the island later became the summer home of Charles Kingsmill, the first admiral of the Royal Canadian Navy, and served as a genteel hub for Ottawa society life. Kingsmill’s daughter, Diana, who had a lifelong association with pacifist Quakers, took over Grindstone and turned it into a nonviolent resistance education center, staging legendary   games that recreated the infamous Stanford Prison Experiment as a way to train the “prisoners” to fight oppression with noncooperation  —   a practice that ended after a disastrous fake “invasion” by a local biker gang retained for the purpose. I came to Grindstone as a young teenager in the   attending the annual summer camps run by the nonprofit cooperative the Quakers put together to manage the island. The camps’ explicit mission was to train a new generation of activists, another step on the ladder that they had climbed, through trade unionism, farmers’ unions, suffragism and feminism, to antiwar activism. Grindstone was full of kids like me:   babies who attended alternative public schools in Toronto, Kingston and Ottawa, who could rhyme the classic protest chant “   ” with the facility of lifelong practice. Today it sounds hopelessly idealistic. But in the ’80s, Grindstone was a perfect incubator for young activists. With its quiet paths, crisp lake swimming and isolated spots with names like Moonwatcher’s Point, the Grindstone experience was one part lazing around and chatting, one part intense, practical instruction. The Victorian cottages we slept in had once housed the political elites of Ottawa society and their celebrity friends. Now they were ours. I’ve always been an early riser, and it was on Grindstone that I became addicted to sunrises, swimming around the island to catch them on the still lake amid the loon calls, then rushing in a shiver back to my cabin to change for breakfast and morning meeting on the broad, shaded porch of the main lodge. As I graduated out of the summer camps, I became active in the maintenance and management of the island, volunteering in the kitchens and serving on the  ’s board. When the  ’s finances crashed with the   recession, we sold the island to a dentist from Kingston who planned to commute by small pontoon plane. I was devastated. Today, Grindstone is the private home of David Bearman and Jennifer Trant  —   museum technology pioneers who fell in love with the island the first time they saw it, immediately dissolved their successful consultancy and took up residence there, running small conferences for people interested in museums and the web. Five years ago my family and I were their guests. The island felt haunted by the ghosts of the friends I’d made there and the dreams we’d shared. It has been 25 years since I left Grindstone on its final weekend as a social justice education center, and not a week goes by without my yearning for it with a kind of joy and sorrow that is sunk very deep in my heart. I visit it in my dreams, and in the photo feeds from its current owners when I see them at museum conferences, I demand to know all the minutiae of the island’s upkeep, which trees survived the winter storms and what color they’re painting the porch this year. I live in Burbank, Calif. now, and I take my    daughter on hikes in the nearby mountains. Sometimes, when we sit on a trailside boulder and listen to the winds soughing in the trees, I can almost pretend that I’ve brought her back to Grindstone, the place I had always assumed I would raise my own family. Cory Doctorow is the author of the forthcoming novel “Walkaway” and a special adviser to the Electronic Frontier Foundation. The Hawker Siddeley HS 748 is a delightful,   turboprop relic of an airplane, with metal everywhere you expect plastic, made to land on gravel or ice. Nestled in a Hawker, I flew north from Whitehorse, Yukon’s capital city, past 300 miles of moonscape  —   gray craters scarred by the white lines of mining roads that seemed to loop and go nowhere  —   before Dawson City appeared through a hole in the cloud cover. The subarctic town, nicknamed “Paris of the North” during the late   Gold Rush, looked like a strange, solitary incursion on the land. I was there to spend three months living in the childhood home of the Canadian writer Pierre Berton, who had donated the house for this purpose. A volunteer picked me up at the   airport. On the drive through town, we passed a truck with an animal carcass in the bed, antlers poking out past a tarp.   black birds pecked at the exposed edges. “If you leave your moose out, the ravens will get at it,” the volunteer said. The Yukon River divided the town into Dawson proper and West Dawson, a scattered community of   cabins whose inhabitants hauled their own wood, water and propane. I walked down to the river almost every day. It was October, and the black, bottomless water flowed fast toward Alaska. Over the next few weeks, the river changed. First the water took on the faint sheen of an oil slick. Then slivers of ice began to race along the current, catching the light like the heads and bellies of surfacing seals. Then bigger,   chunks of ice formed, audibly colliding and jostling for space until they clustered and   at a bottleneck bend. Finally, one morning in November, I woke to an eerie, noticeable silence. I went down to the river’s beach sheets of ice overlapped where they’d heaved onto the shore, their exposed   resembling massive blocks of turquoise glass. A government employee had drilled into the ice and laid out orange flags indicating where the ice was thick enough to walk safely. I watched a dogsled cross. Because of the snow cover, it wasn’t immediately clear where the ground ended and the river began. As I stepped out, I could hear ice continuing to crack, the sound of trickling water running in open rivulets. Under my feet, I’d been told, ran water deep enough to swallow a truck. This would be a stupid way to die, I thought. Halfway across, I stopped and looked south, toward where the Yukon River met the Klondike River. At this time of year, the sun rose so late and set so early that it circled the horizon in a continuous blaze of orange. Part of the Canadian identity is that we’re a hardy people, thriving in the inhospitable north. It’s one of those myths so ingrained and pervasive that you believe it even if, like me  —   like most  —   you have lived your whole life in cities less than 60 miles north of the American border. For just a moment, my breath clouding around me, icicles forming on my chin, I stood in that mythical Canada. I crossed and hiked triumphantly around West Dawson, which had been inaccessible except by helicopter during the  . The temperature dropped below   degrees Celsius. When I returned to the house, hours later, I peeled off my jeans and saw that my thighs, like my cheeks and nose, were a raw, violent red. Out on the river, I had seen two other people crossing. The first glided past on   skis with a baby strapped to his chest. The second was an acquaintance pulling a sled. “Just picking up my mail!” he called. Kim Fu is the author of the novel “For Today I Am a Boy” and the poetry collection “How Festive the Ambulance. ”  Hans Johann was a capitalist pig farmer, a man who owned the pigs and the farm. His wife was Barbara. They were both German Mennonites. After World War II, both had fled with their families from what was once Prussia to Niagara, which is where, on some acres between the lake and the waterfalls, they stayed and became Mama and Papa, then Oma and Opa. My mother, Linda, was the fourth of Oma and Opa’s seven children, born and christened at such a rate that the family could not afford middle names. Mama made up for this by calling me “Sarah Nicole,” while my father, one of four from the suburbs, has never said anything but “Sarah. ” At home in London, Ontario, I sided with my dad, thinking two names were less smart than one but when we went to the pig farm, my name was turned by thick German tongues into “   . ” This older, extrinsic version of me was the one I liked best. Summers belonged to Niagara. Driving to the farm in a station wagon with no empty seats, we knew we were close when the asphalt turned to dirt and had arrived when the dirt turned to gravel. A long lane,   in birches, led to an ancient Mercedes or two and a big John Deere tractor, a nameless cat curled under the exhaust pipe. In the kitchen, we ate Oma’s bread with havarti cheese and   summer grapes, on which a skim of dust belied a   of gold. What did we need money for? Nothing. Ice cream, maybe, if we wanted it in a cone from Avondale Dairy. Turtles swam with us in the pool, the water cold and unchlorinated under scum, colored the dim vegetative green of fairy tales before they’re Americanized. Oma said her ferns would grow better if we urinated in the soil, and we rolled our eyes but did it, one at a time. I sneaked away to the gully, read my aunt’s ahistorical romance novels. My brother shot a dove with a BB gun. Pigs screamed in the barn. It seemed in those summers impossible that the sun could either burn me or fail to wake me up, that I could ever be sick for more than three days or have an allergy. I was no more friends with nature than I was friends with my kin, yet it seemed that nature and I felt the same way: indifferent to the rules, remote no matter how we were tamed. My grandfather is alive, freshly widowed. Though he no longer capitalizes on much or practices animal husbandry, he lives in the bungalow on the farm and makes and sells peach and grape jam. Everyone thinks they know what peach and grape jam taste like, but I maintain that Opa’s jam can make you forget what a fruit is. Sarah Nicole Prickett is a writer in New York and the founder of Adult Magazine.  A few years ago, I got to pick a small village to stay in for a while and write poetry. I chose the Missisquoi Valley, in the Eastern Townships of Quebec, because I liked what the bay’s First Nations name meant: many aquatic birds. Indeed, I saw birds everywhere: in my dreams, above my head, through the windows. I saw the wind, too, moving across the cornfields. The region also brought me back to my love of New England. When choosing the town I was to stay in, I’d randomly pointed at a little village called Mystic. It was an enticing name. I’d also found a sister city in the United States with the same name, which had a museum with a room dedicated to Herman Melville. When I write, I always let myself be led by coincidence. I quickly started inventing connections between Melville and the Québécois Mystic between me scribbling notes in a rented Cavalier and the trailblazers of real and fictional territory that were the great American writers of the 19th century. I also imagined stories of the devil whirling around in the town’s   barn, and created my own private numerology. I would look for covered bridges on the road, round barns built by utopian Quakers and Victorian houses. I thought about loyalists fleeing north after the Revolutionary War, about Irish Catholics fleeing famine, about all the immigrants who left their mark along the path. I knew that by venturing further, to the shores of the great Lake Memphremagog, I would also think about the Vietnam War deserters who’d found refuge there. I thought about the First Nation Abenakis, how they named the lakes and rivers, and about our ignorance. I began my stay at Pike River, but I understood that this road was one where each stop would lead to another. I walked into the office of tourism in Stanbridge Station, my next stop, and asked a petite historian a thousand questions. She showed me Chemin St.  on the map, which she called the second prettiest road in Quebec. (I never learned where the first was.) I didn’t stay in Mystic. As soon as I caught sight of the old cemetery in Hunter Mills, I became fascinated by the border zone between Quebec and the United States. It represented the state I was in myself: a wandering state of mind, looking for ghosts, mine and others’ looking for my words, my promised land, my house built stone by stone throughout my life. And that is how, having been asked to stay in a small village, I found myself gathering the rosary beads of hamlets strung along the border area. I’m still enamored with the scenery I found there: isolated villages in the shadow of the mountains, whose grandeur lorded over long lakes and rivers farms and cornfields a Mercedes up on four blocks amid the junk strewn in front of an abandoned house old   cemeteries that pop up at every turn leafy trees of maple, walnut, beech, oak, birch a few wayside crosses old churches and train stations and checkpoints and in the morning, at the inn by the river, a little black cat sitting on a tree branch listening to the sound of the falls and the purring coffeepot. Élise Turcotte, a poet and novelist, is the author of “The Sound of Living Things” and “Guyana. ” Translated by Allison M. Charette. En français: Il y a quelques années, on m’a demandé de séjourner dans un petit village de mon choix afin d’y écrire des poèmes. J’ai choisi la vallée de la Missisquoi dans les cantons de l’est en Québec, parce que j’aimais la signification du nom donné par les Premières Nations à la baie: beaucoup d’oiseaux aquatiques. Déjà, je voyais des oiseaux partout, dans mes rêves, autour de ma tête, derrière les fenêtres. Je voyais aussi le vent bouger à travers les champs de maïs. Cette région me ramenait aussi à mon amour de la  . Afin de choisir le village de mon séjour, j’avais pointé mon doigt sur un petit village appelé Mystic. Ce nom m’attirait. J’avais aussi découvert une ville homonyme aux   où il y avait, dans un musée, une salle dédiée à Melville. Je me laisse toujours guider par les coïncidences pour écrire. J’inventais d’ores et déjà des liens entre Melville et le Mystic québécois entre moi prenant des notes dans une Cavalier louée, et ces défricheurs de territoires réels et fictifs que sont les grands écrivains américains du 19e siècle. J’imaginais aussi des histoires de diable tournant en rond dans la Grange à douze côtés, et créais une numérologie intime à moi. Je chercherais les ponts couverts sur la route, les granges rondes construites par des quakers utopiques, les maisons à façade victorienne je pensais à la fuite des loyalistes vers le nord, aux Irlandais catholiques fuyant la famine, à tous ces immigrants ayant laissé leurs traces sur le chemin. Je savais qu’en m’aventurant plus loin, aux abords du grand lac Memphrémagog, je penserais aussi aux déserteurs de la guerre du Vietnam. Je pensais aux Abénaquis des Premières Nations, qui ont donné les noms aux lacs et aux rivières, à notre ignorance. À   là où mon séjour commençait, j’ai compris cependant que j’étais sur une route où chaque arrêt menait à un autre. Je suis entrée dans le bureau du tourisme, j’ai posé mille questions à une petite historienne de Stanbridge Station. Elle m’a indiqué sur la carte où se trouve Chemin   la deuxième plus belle route du Québec. (Je n’ai pas jamais appris où se situe la première). Et je ne suis pas restée à Mystic: dès que j’ai aperçu le vieux cimetière de Hunter Mills, c’est la zone frontalière entre le Québec et les   qui m’a fascinée. Elle était l’illustration de l’état dans lequel je me trouvais, dans l’esprit de l’errance, à la recherche de fantômes, les miens, ceux des autres à la recherche de mes mots, ma terre promise, ma maison construite pierre après pierre tout au long de ma vie. Et c’est ainsi qu’appelée à séjourner dans un petit village, je me suis retrouvée à ramasser les grains d’un chapelet de hameaux dispersés sur le chemin de la frontière. Le décor que j’y ai trouvé m’enchante toujours: villages enclavés dans l’ombre des montagnes, dont le grandeur veillaient sur les lacs longs et les rivières fermes et champs de maïs une Mercedes sur quatre blocs à travers le débarras devant une maison à l’abandon de vieux cimetières   qui surprennent à chaque détour des arbres feuillus, érables, noyers, êtres, chênes, bouleaux quelques croix de chemin d’anciennes gares et églises, de vieux postes de frontière et le matin, à l’auberge, un petit chat noir perché sur une branche d’arbre écoutant le bruit des chutes et de la cafetière qui ronronne.

0 - Updated: 11:50 p. m. The New York Times is driving to Friday’s inauguration with supporters of   Donald J. Trump. On Wednesday, we traveled with a woman from Massachusetts, the bluest state east of the Mississippi. On Thursday, we joined a man from West Virginia, the reddest state in the East. Dianna Ploss, 53, is a volunteer organizer for Mr. Trump, a turn of fate that surprised even her  —   a longtime Democrat who until recently was uninterested in politics. I am a national correspondent for The Times, originally from Granville, Mass. and I rode with a photographer in the back seat of a Dodge pickup driven by Dianna’s friend Scott Hayes, a landscaper. There was a cardboard cutout of Mr. Trump, too. Along the way, we talked about life, Mr. Trump and the future of America. We stopped at a McDonald’s, Cracker Barrel, Applebee’s and multiple rest areas. We listened to Abba, the Supremes, Fleetwood Mac, Cheryl Lynn and Obama. I got carsick. And   hours later, we made it to Washington. SABRINA TAVERNISE _____ GLOUCESTER, Mass. 10:27 a. m.: I just wrapped up a Facebook Live video introduction to Dianna and Scott, and we’re about to leave for the drive. For her part, Dianna spent the past year working tirelessly for Mr. Trump’s campaign, spending her own money and countless hours to get him elected. She was even a delegate at the Republican convention. She also lived for years in Cambridge, where Hillary Clinton won 88 percent of the vote. (Mr. Trump got 6 percent.) She has a rare ability to move back and forth between the two worlds. She has a lot to say about both. She had never really been that interested in politics. She grew up in Boston in the 1970s. Her dad worked as a school bus driver. Her mom raised four children and tended bar. “We were all Democrats back then,” she says. “Forty years later, we are all Republicans. ” Miles driven: 0. Miles to go: 470. _____ NEAR WORCESTER, Mass. 11:59 a. m.: It has started to snow. The truck’s windows are steaming up. Dianna is talking to people on the phone, trying to help them find a place to stay in Washington. The Airbnb she will be staying in there is filling up fast. Her phone is pinging with people talking to her on Facebook. It’s like a giant extended family all chattering at once. Her journey to this point has been quite a trip of its own. Dianna’s adult life happened suddenly and soon. She got pregnant as a freshman in high school  —   a Catholic school. She was afraid. She says she got through it by putting each part of her life in a different room and closing the door. At graduation, she was the student council president. She thought she should go to college, but now she had a daughter. She had an underachiever boyfriend. She had no money. And her family did not understand what college would get her. It took her 10 years to finish community college. She worked in a bank, painting houses, as a secretary in an   shop. In her   she decided to go to nursing school. She worked in cardiac surgery, in psychiatry, in urgent care. She did well, but she didn’t like it. What she really liked was volunteering. And organizing. She knew nothing about running, but became the director of a private track club, managing 25 coaches and 200 kids ages 8 to 14, and raising the money to support it. When she had the kids sell a coupon book with discounts from local businesses, it was the     the club had ever run. Miles driven: 71. Miles to go: 399. _____ CHARLTON, Mass. 12:26 p. m.: I am carsick. Scott spots a rest area and pulls in. Dianna buys me a Coke and even finds me generic   medicine in a store. “Here you go, honey,” she says kindly. “Sit down. You don’t look so good. ” I’m drinking a full sugar Coke, and my stomach is already starting to feel better. Miles driven: 83. Miles to go: 387. _____ STURBRIDGE, Mass. 12:47 p. m.: “Oh my God! You got to put this one in!” Dianna says, looking through a stack of CDs. “The Partridge Family?! Are you nuts?” says Scott. “I have Abba,” she says. “Neil Diamond. Chicago. Bee Gees. But I love the Partridge Family. ” Scott: “Oh boy. ” The music begins to play. “I woke up in love this morning. Went to sleep with you on my mind. ” “It’s a very complicated song,” she says, laughing. Miles driven: 92. Miles to go: 378. _____ NEAR HARTFORD, 1:07 p. m.: Dianna reads through some of the comments on the Facebook Live segment: Lots of angry shouting about Trump. Some of it about us. I ask Dianna how she feels. “Uncomfortable,” she says. As much as she is part of the Trump team, she tries to avoid alienating people. Maybe that comes from having lived in Cambridge. Maybe that comes from her personality as a networker. “I try to encourage people not to yell,” she says. “I had a little meeting with women who are part of the volunteer team. I said, ‘If our goal is getting people to go toward Trump, criticizing them isn’t the right way. It makes you look bad, too.’ ” “I don’t attack people personally,” she adds. “Except if I’m by myself and the TV is on. ” She pops an Abba album into the truck’s CD player. Miles driven: 126. Miles to go: 344. _____ WETHERSFIELD, Conn. 1:30 p. m.: I ask Dianna how someone who grew up a Democrat in Massachusetts could have wound up a Trump voter. Her move toward politics, she explains, was less a burning ideological expression and more an affinity for people, and for bringing them together. She was good at leading people, but the world was also changing. In 2015, she sold her house in Cambridge and quit nursing to focus on an invention that involves beverages. “I was living in my camper in Framingham in my friend’s yard,” she says. “They were liberal. Stuff was happening  —   San Bernardino, Paris. I’d think: I don’t know if I agree with them. ” When Mr. Trump announced his candidacy in 2015, she felt no sudden spark, she says. But his message steadily seeped in, like a   realization about herself and her beliefs: one she had always had, but had never really considered. “People were lying down everywhere,” she says, recalling protests about police violence. “They were lying down in Harvard Square. They were lying down on Route 93. They blocked traffic for three hours.   is a really congested road you want to pull your hair out anyway. To shut it down? What the hell is going on? What are these people doing?” At some point, she registered as a Republican. “I was trying to find out who I am in this whole crazy mess,” she says. “I feel like I had to take a stand. It was just crazy. I couldn’t understand it. ” Miles driven: 135. Miles to go: 335. _____ BERLIN, Conn. 1:37 p. m.: It has stopped raining. I ask Dianna how she came to like Mr. Trump. She says she did not take his candidacy seriously at first. “All I knew about him was that reality show,” she says. But when she tuned in, she realized he appealed to her. “I really liked Trump’s   thing. I grew up, I went to Catholic school. We did the Pledge of Allegiance every day. That was important. ” “I started to pay attention not to what he was saying, but to the effect that he had. The freedom of speech things. He said outrageous things but so what. People would get so worked up over outrageous things. ” “He was the tough guy. I like that he stood up for himself. He didn’t take any garbage from people. He retaught people how to have their  . He showed that you can stand up for yourself. ” Miles driven: 142. Miles to go: 328. _____ NORWALK, Conn. 2:53 p. m.: “Oh, they were not happy in there,” Dianna announces, emerging from a McDonald’s with Scott, the Trump cutout and a small bag of French fries. (I had been in the bathroom and missed the action.) “The guy behind the counter said, ‘We don’t do politics,’” Dianna reports. “I told him we just needed some fries. ” A woman in a puffy blue jacket sitting at the window bangs on the glass with her fist. Having caught our attention, she points her finger at the cardboard Trump and gives a deep   motion. We are standing in the parking lot, and two women walk briskly up to Dianna. “I love Mr. Trump, trust me,” says Lillia Millard, a retired translator who was born in Russia and now lives in West Norwalk. “He says it like it is, just like me. ” Dianna asks if she is going to watch the inauguration. “Yes!” she says enthusiastically. Her daughter, a journalist, will not. “She’s going to the women’s march, unfortunately,” Ms. Millard says, adding, “I still have until Saturday to talk her out of it. ” Scott gives her a   bumper sticker, and we pull back out onto the highway to the music of Grand Funk Railroad. Miles driven: 202. Miles to go: 268. _____ DARIEN, Conn. 3:26 p. m.: We are stopping again. The rest stop is all beige plastic and fake wood. A television is playing President Obama’s last news conference. It is barely audible under a thumping Stevie Nicks song. It is in the final minutes. “There are a lot more good people than bad in this country,” he says. Dianna says back: “Yeah. I agree with that. I do. ” He says that he curses more behind closed doors. “So do I,” Dianna says. He is talking about his daughters. He keeps going. He says he believes in this country. Dianna stops agreeing. “Do you believe he believes in this country?” I ask her. “No,” she replies. “I don’t believe that. ” I ask her why. “For all these years, people said all this stuff about him and I didn’t believe them,” she said. “But he has done so much to harm America. He basically tried to be Robin Hood. His trade policies. His willingness to try to take away from people who had more and give to those who had less. ” “The middle class shrunk, more people ended up at the bottom. That was as the result of him. Obamacare was a big part of this. Look how much money it costs me just for my health care. It didn’t make sense to me. It’s hard to know. Is it really what’s in his heart, or are his ideals getting in his way?” Miles driven: 207. Miles to go: 263. _____ Still in DARIEN, Conn. 4:33 p. m.: We’re eating spicy hummus and carrots at the Darien, Conn. rest stop. I am asking Dianna about Mr. Obama. She didn’t vote for him. But she defended him when her family or friends would attack him. Now, she is glad to see him go. Part of that is because of policing. “The first thing he said that struck me was when he said the Cambridge police acted stupidly,” she said, referring to Mr. Obama’s remark about the arrest of Henry Louis Gates Jr. a black Harvard professor, in 2009 as Mr. Gates tried to enter his own home. “When that comment came out, something in my head went, ‘Huh? ’” “Then he said, ‘Trayvon Martin could have been my son.’ Maybe that’s what he’s thinking, but when he says something like that as a leader, people listen. I had this like, ‘What?’ I was confused by that. What are you doing?” She added: “Things have changed in terms of the criminality. People will do anything. They are going up to cops and executing them. People are blowing themselves up. They are ramming trucks into things. If you alienate the police, then we are going to have no law and order. ” On Mr. Obama, she said: “When you are the leader, there are times when you have to bite your tongue. ” She added: “I feel the irony in that, because people will say Donald Trump doesn’t bite his tongue. I want to see how it plays out once he’s president. I don’t know the answer. ” Miles driven: 207. Miles to go: 263. _____ FORT LEE, N. J. 6 p. m.: We are back on   closer now to the end of our trip than to the beginning. The Supremes are playing our driver, Scott, is grateful that we are no longer listening to Abba. We have just crossed over the George Washington Bridge. I’m asking Dianna and Scott about immigration. For Scott, economics undergirds his thinking. Two friends used to give him a lot of landscaping work 10 or 15 years ago, but have since stopped they have Latin American employees now. Another client, who recently sold a company for millions, said he wanted to cut Scott’s rate to $20 an hour from $30 and asked him if he could learn Spanish to manage a work crew. “Fundamentally, it’s not fair,” he says. “I’m working seven days a week now so I can carry myself through the winter. They say Republicans want the cheaper labor and Democrats want the votes. But I think they both want cheaper labor. People with money just want cheaper labor. ” He says he does not blame the laborers, but is angry with politicians who talk as if it were not a problem. “If I was a poor person south of the border, I’d probably do the same thing,” he says. Scott, 58, who lives in Beverly, Mass. has led rafting trips in Texas on the Rio Grande for years. In 2010, he says, he was at the end of a rafting trip when he saw five people trying to cross the river. They appeared to be asking him to help them across. He kept going. Several months later, Janet Napolitano  —   then the secretary of homeland security  —   was nearby, in Laredo, Tex. and said the border had never been more secure. Scott says he did not believe her. “You lose your language, border and your culture, you’re going to lose your country,” he says, sounding one of the  ’s campaign themes. “Your country is done. ” Miles driven: 240. Miles to go: 230. _____ EAST WINDSOR, N. J. 6:57 p. m.: The car is silent. Dianna: “Do you like lobster?” Scott: “I like it, but it’s expensive. ” Dianna: “I just don’t like fighting with my food. ” Scott: “The only thing that’s really good is the tail. ” Dianna: “The only thing that’s really good is the butter. Anything tastes good dipped in butter. ” Miles driven: 296. Miles to go: 174. _____ MOUNT HOLLY, N. J. 7:38 p. m.  We pulled into a Cracker Barrel for dinner. Dianna had never been inside one. “O. K. there’s country music in the bathroom,” she said. “It smells nice  —   like candles or something. ” She surveys the store. She looks at a wall full of coffee mugs with names on them: Grandpa. Papa. Mom. “Look at all these cups. It’s spewing happiness. It’s like a quaint little town or something. ” We left because there was no table with an outlet near it for Dianna or me. Miles driven: 318. Miles to go: 152. _____ WESTAMPTON, N. J. 8:11 p. m.: We are waiting for dinner in an Applebee’s. I ask Dianna and Scott what they expect from Mr. Trump and if they are afraid he might disappoint them. “If he doesn’t deliver on the economy, I’ll be disappointed,” Scott says. “He says he’s going to change the tax rate for the middle class. That’s huge for me. I bought a house five years ago and the taxes have gone up $200 every single year. ” Scott doesn’t trusts the elites  —   entrenched politicians with money. “I don’t trust McCain, I don’t trust Rubio, I don’t trust Paul Ryan,” he says. “I love Trump for calling out the elites and the ruling class for who they are. Because they have forgotten about the working man and working woman. ” He is also suspicious of the term “comprehensive immigration reform. ” Dianna says: “Anytime a politician uses the word comprehensive, it makes you think they are lying. It’s just an empty word. Smoke and mirrors. They throw big words around, make it look like they are actually doing something. Makes people feel like, almost like they are not smart enough to understand what they are doing. ” She added, “I think Trump will deliver. ” Our dinner comes. Two shrimp salads and a burger. Miles driven: 319. Miles to go: 151. _____ NEW CASTLE, Del. 9:51 p. m.: We are getting sleepy. Another toll, this one for the Delaware Memorial Bridge. Scott thinks the sign says $400. “What! ?” Dianna says in mock shock. “Got to pay for that wall somehow. ” Everybody laughs. We pull up to the cash lane. An older woman in a wool hat, glasses and a yellow security vest hands us change. Holding up the Trump cardboard cutout, Dianna asks: “Do you know who this is?” The woman responds in a deadpan voice: “I’ve never seen him in my life. ” But when she is asked if she likes him, a smile creeps onto her face. “Thumbs up,” she says. Miles driven: 366. Miles to go: 104. _____ NEWARK, Del. 10:03 p. m.: It’s dark. Dinner’s over. Disco is playing: Cheryl Lynn’s “Got To Be Real. ” Dianna is driving to give Scott a rest. Cardboard Trump is still smirking in the back seat. “I’m getting out my bell bottoms,” says Scott drily. I sing for a while. Dianna does too. Then I ask about health care. “I spent probably $20, 000 on health care last year,” Dianna says. She was paying about $850 a month through a private plan she bought herself. But her deductible for    care jumped to $4, 500 from $3, 000.   she says, jumped to $3, 000 from $2, 000. Dianna, who has been living off the proceeds from the sale of her house in Cambridge, says she could have gotten insured through Obamacare last year, because she was not working. But she chose not to. “I said, Dianna, how can you go on food stamps and get free health care if you are volunteering for Trump? I thought it would be the wrong thing to do. ” But now she has Obamacare. She is helping to support her father, she explains, and her budget has gotten tight. “I don’t feel good that I had to do that,” she says. “I have more control over my life when I have better health insurance. It’s also about pride. ” Miles driven: 381. Miles to go: 89. _____ BALTIMORE, 10:50 p. m.: Hurtling through Maryland. Fleetwood Mac’s greatest hits playing, “Rhiannon” among them. Whatever happens with Mr. Trump, Scott Hayes has already won something important: a deep network of people who think like him. He has a flip phone. He is not on Facebook. But he believes he will hold on to those new connections. They have revived him. Made him feel more alive. “I always felt so alone, like nobody wanted to hear what I was saying,” he says. “So I’d go to these rallies just to see if there were other people who thought like I did. Now I’m meeting all kinds of people. It’s been awesome. ” Dianna wants to keep up the momentum with all the people she has met, too. Like the woman named May who owns a Chinese restaurant in Newton, Mass. and who went up to New Hampshire on Tuesdays with some of her staff to volunteer. Dianna organized a Christmas party for Trump supporters in Massachusetts in December. There was Champagne on every table. The cardboard cutout of Trump was there, too. “I’m relieved,” she says. “He won. I think he’s going to deliver. ” Miles driven: 427. Miles to go: 43. _____ WASHINGTON, 11:50 p. m.: We pull into the parking garage at Dianna’s Airbnb in southwest Washington, ride the elevator to the eighth floor, and walk into a spacious   with parquet floors. Scott holds cardboard Trump. There is a view of the Washington Monument. “Wow, it’s huge,” Dianna says, looking out a long glass sliding door. “This is, like, pretty fancy. ” Scott stands the   up. I ask the two of them how it feels to be at the end of this    journey. “It’s the end, but it’s the beginning,” Dianna says. “Now, it’s a new chapter in our lives, for the country, for Mr. Trump. Let’s see what he can do. ” Miles driven: 470. Miles to go: 0.

0 - GLEN ELDER, Kan.  —   Doug Palen, a   grain farmer on Kansas’   plains, is in the business of understanding the climate. Since 2012, he has choked through the harshest drought to hit the Great Plains in a century, punctuated by freakish snowstorms and suffocating gales of dust. His planting season starts earlier in the spring and pushes deeper into winter. To adapt, he has embraced an environmentally conscious way of farming that guards against soil erosion and conserves precious water. He can talk for hours about carbon sequestration  —   the trapping of    gases in plant life and in the soil  —   or the science of the beneficial microbes that enrich his land. In short, he is a climate change realist. Just don’t expect him to utter the words “climate change. ” “If politicians want to exhaust themselves debating the climate, that’s their choice,” Mr. Palen said, walking through fields of freshly planted winter wheat. “I have a farm to run. ” Here in   Kansas, America’s breadbasket and conservative heartland, the economic realities of agriculture make climate change a critical business issue. At the same time, politics and social pressure make frank discussion complicated. This is wheat country, and Donald J. Trump country, and though the weather is acting up, the conservative orthodoxy maintains that the science isn’t settled. So while climate change is part of daily conversation, it gets disguised as something else. “People are all talking about it, without talking about it,” said Miriam Horn, the author of a recent book on conservative Americans and the environment, “Rancher, Farmer, Fisherman. ” “It’s become such a charged topic that there’s a navigation people do. ” Mr. Palen  —   he plays his politics close to his vest but allows that he didn’t vote for Hillary Clinton  —   and others here in Glen Elder and across the state illustrate the delicate dance. Farmers like him focus on practical issues like erosion or dwindling aquifers. “When you don’t get the rainfall, it’s tough times,” he said. Regional politicians and business leaders speak of pursuing jobs that clean energy may create, rather than pressing the need to rein in carbon emissions. A science teacher at a community college  —   whose deeply religious students sometimes express doubts about the trustworthiness of science that contradicts biblical teachings  —   speaks to his class about the positives of scientific discovery (electricity) in order to ease into more contentious subjects (global warming). And an editor for a closely followed agriculture magazine, Successful Farming, recently made a controversial move, drawing a flurry of angry letters: He broke with longstanding policy to address climate change  . “Some readers thanked us,” the editor Gil Gullickson said. “But some wondered whether we’d been hijacked by avid environmentalists. ” The climate has not always been such a partisan issue. Richard Nixon, a Republican president, set up the Environmental Protection Agency and signed the Clean Air Act. Ronald Reagan ushered in the Montreal Protocol, the first global treaty to protect the global atmosphere. Much of that consensus has broken down, in no small part because of a   push by   interests, together with influential Republican allies, to attack   research on topics like global warming and push back on environmental regulation. That push began in earnest during the George W. Bush administration as attempts to undercut the Clean Air Act, and since then, the divide has widened. President Trump has famously said he believes that climate change is a hoax invented by the Chinese, and his administration has purged nearly all mention of   programs from the White House and State Department websites. It has also ordered a freeze on federal grant spending at the E. P. A. and other government agencies. The fact that the   discourse has also become dominated by liberals has alienated some conservatives, including Mr. Palen. Many people here in particular resent how, in the polarized political landscape of recent years, conservative Americans have been painted as hostile to the environment. The Trump campaign successfully seized on that schism, painting Democrats as overzealous environmentalists with little sympathy for the economic realities or social mores of rural America. “Many of our federal environmental laws are being used to oppress farmers instead of actually helping the environment,” Mr. Trump quipped in a widely circulated Q. and A. on FarmFutures. com. “Farmers care more for the environment than the radical environmentalists. ” Still, “it would be a huge mistake to think people voting for Trump were voting against the environment,” Ms. Horn said. If Trump follows an aggressive   agenda, she said, “there will be a big backlash in the heartland. ” In many ways, Mr. Palen sees himself as the ultimate conservationist. His   the son of an immigrant from Luxembourg, was the first to farm in this stretch of   Kansas. Mr. Palen grew up on the farm, took it over in his 20s, and looked to make his mark. In college, he learned of a farming technique called “no till,” which is intended to more closely mimic the natural prairie ecosystem, and was intrigued by its promise to protect his family fields from Kansas’ relentless winds and sudden downpours. The idea behind   farming, he now explains to anyone who will listen, is that plowing the soil destroys its natural structure, causing it to lose its precious moisture and nutrients. That makes it vulnerable to erosion. Mr. Palen’s fields aren’t tilled. There are no neat furrows. The residue of plants from previous plantings still carpets the earth, offering a layer of protection, and his fields are never bare even after harvest. He alternates wheat and other crops with what he describes as a cocktail of grasses and leafy plants, like grain sorghum, sunflowers and alfalfa, a gesture toward the diversity of the wild prairie. “They say there’s more organisms in a handful of soil than people on the planet,” Mr. Palen said, making his way through a field between plantings. He stooped his tall frame down, dug up a clump of earth, and rolled it between his fingers. He is   yet when he talks of the earth, his excitement is obvious. “See how it’s firm and holds together?” he said. “See how it doesn’t break down into goo?”   farming addresses a dire problem facing American farmers: Almost 1. 7 billion tons of topsoil are blown or washed off croplands a year, according to the Department of Agriculture, resulting in billions of dollars in losses for farmers. Keeping the soil healthy and covered also reduces evaporation by 80 percent, helping farmers conserve water, the department estimates. Farmers like Mr. Palen also happen to be protecting a vast and valuable carbon sink, making him an ally to   campaigners. The soil traps far more carbon in its depths than all plant and animal life on the earth’s surface, scientists estimate. A 2013 study estimated that   and other restorative farming methods could achieve up to 15 percent of the total carbon reduction needed to stabilize the climate. Despite his conservationist streak, Mr. Palen has no affinity for environmentalists. He feels vilified, he says, for his continued use of chemical herbicides and pesticides. (Some organic farmers control weeds by tilling the soil, which Mr. Palen argues causes more ecological harm.) And he remains suspicious of any expansion of government regulations that ignore realities of rural America. “We want to be left alone,” Mr. Palen said. He singled out the Clean Water Rule, an E. P. A. regulation designed to protect streams and other waterways, as regulatory overreach. Washington types wanted to dictate what he could do with every creek, every puddle, on his farm, he said, putting impossible burdens on farmers. And most of them had probably never spent any time on a farm, he said. “We’re the ones working to protect the environment. We’re the ones whose lives are tied to the earth. ” Carl Priesendorf, a science teacher at Metropolitan Community College in Kansas City, Mo. has learned strategies to talk about climate change without completely alienating climate skeptics. He teaches geology and meteorology. Those subjects would usually be innocuous, but not here. “I’d show the CO2 data  —   how we’d had the hottest year on record,” Mr. Priesendorf said. “But I get students who basically say what I’m teaching is nonsense. My car’s been keyed. I get notes from students saying they’re praying for my soul. ” One such note that he shared reads, “Know that God’s love surpasses knowledge. ” Since a particularly contentious debate in class  —   a student threw a book bag at him, he said  —   Mr. Priesendorf has taken a step back to focus on the everyday positives of science. “I ask: ‘Do you like the light bulb? Do you like electricity?’ That’s science,” he said. “Then I ease into more contentious topics, like climate change. ” That is an uphill battle. A 2013 survey found that just 8 percent of farmers in the Midwest believed that “climate change is occurring, and it is caused mostly by human activities. ” An earlier Pew Research Center poll found that only 48 percent of people in the Midwest agree with the statement that there is “solid evidence that the average temperature on earth has been getting warmer,” a number below other regions in the country. And conservatives have been pushing back against classroom standards adopted by the state of Kansas that treat evolution and climate change as scientific concepts. Last year, the United States Supreme Court declined to review a nonprofit group’s lawsuit that claimed that those standards promote atheism. But now, under a Trump administration, Mr. Priesendorf felt science itself was under fire. “If even your government starts telling your country that scientists are lying to you, it’ll be even tougher for science teachers,” he said. “I’m going to focus on keeping my students’ minds open to the possibility that the science is correct. ” Annie Kuether, a Democrat and   advocate in the   Statehouse and a member of the State Utilities Committee, has for years pushed for more renewable energy. One obstacle, though, is that the committee’s chairman does not believe in climate change. A St. Louis native who landed in Topeka as a young bride four decades ago, Ms. Kuether is used to working alongside adversaries. Her county voted for Mr. Trump, along with all but two counties in the state. She has sat through committee meetings where climate skeptics, including the discredited scientist   Soon, blasted the science behind global warming. “Carbon Dioxide, CO2, is merely a bit player in climate change,” reads one slide Mr. Soon presented in 2013. “Rising CO2 is largely beneficial to plant and human life. ” “I remember being horrified,” Ms. Kuether said. Still, over the years, she has forged powerful business alliances by focusing, in her arguments, on jobs and the economy. She has also found increasing support from farmers and landowners who count on wind turbines and solar panels they host on their property for income. “Gradually, from a political standpoint, you can build a constituency that benefits from this industry,” said Mark Lawlor, one ally and an executive at Clean Line Energy Partners, which is building a    transmission line to deliver 4, 000 megawatts of wind power from western Kansas to Missouri, Illinois and other neighboring states. “Just like grain, cattle, airplanes, wind’s another valuable resource Kansas can export,” he said, referring to Kansas’ sizable agricultural industry, as well as the Cessna Aircraft Company, which is based in Wichita, Kan. “Kansas has a lot of pragmatic folks here, and we recognize benefits. ” Kansas’ dwindling water sources have been another issue that Ms. Kuether has found strikes a nerve among voters here, whatever their beliefs on climate change. That has helped to build some support for measures to save the state’s shrinking aquifers, a lifeline for communities in western Kansas, though not yet any decisive action. In fact, her focus on the practical is a big part of what has kept getting her elected, she said, in a State Legislature where she is outnumbered by Republican lawmakers, two to one. “I’ve always felt that families have always been concerned about water  —   whether they’re Democratic, Republican or independent,” she said. Mr. Gullickson of Successful Farming, who usually writes about topics like pigweed, gypsum and runoff, has started to push the envelope on debates over climate change. An   veteran of the magazine, where he is the crops technology editor, Mr. Gullickson said he had long been on the fence about climate change. But that began changing five years ago, when he attended a workshop where a University of Kentucky professor gave a convincing argument, backed by data. “I started looking at the evidence, at the data and what farmers were doing,” he said. “And it’s clear: The weather has become more extreme these days. And I thought, ‘I’ve never heard of any successful business publication that stayed in business by withholding information. ’” So for the first time in the storied magazine’s    history, a cover story squarely addressed the science of climate change. The October 2014 piece was published under the headline, “@#$*% Weather!” “I know what you’re thinking: Climate change is just some figment of Al Gore’s imagination adopted by liberal   who want to tank the U. S. economy,” Mr. Gullickson wrote. “Still, think back over some rough weather you’ve endured in recent years and ask yourself these questions,” he continued. “Are springs getting wetter? Are droughts increasing in severity? Are rainstorms increasing in intensity?” The clear answer, he said: “Yes. ” Mr. Gullickson said that he and his editor had held lengthy discussions leading up to the article’s publication. His editor in chief, Dave Kurns, was supportive, he said, but also warned that the piece could generate backlash. Mr. Kurns spoke candidly over concerns of a backlash in an editor’s note that led the issue. When he became the magazine’s editor two years earlier, he said, he had been warned, “Never use the words ‘climate change. ’” “I was told: ‘Readers hate that phrase. Just talk about the weather,’” he wrote. The industry publication, which has a circulation of 390, 000, was influenced by some of the biggest names in agriculture taking a stand on the issue, Mr. Gullickson said. The agricultural giant Cargill has started to lobby members of Congress and urged farmers to take climate change seriously, saying inaction would be detrimental to the United States economy. The response to the magazine’s take on the issues has been split. “When you start quoting ‘climate scientists’ and the United Nations,” wrote in one reader, Bill Clinger, a farmer based in Harpster, Ohio, “you are as nutty as Al Gore. ” Measures to control emissions, he said, “are just seductive names for socialist programs intended to micromanage people and businesses. ” Mr. Gullickson said some readers thanked him. “Finally, a farming magazine comes to terms with what is going on with the weather,” wrote Paul Jereczek of Dodge, Wis. Reached by phone, Mr. Jereczek, who runs a dairy farm, expressed exasperation at people’s inability to speak openly. “The phrase has become so politicized, it’s just hard to talk about,” he said. “But we talk about everything else. Even round here, protecting soil is such a hot topic right now. But we talk about the soil, saving fertilizer, that sort of thing. ” Mark Salvo, vice president at the wildlife conservation group Defenders of Wildlife, might be a walking, talking stereotype of the kind of environmentalist who so frustrates Mr. Palen. An Oregonian now based in Washington, he spent 15 years in the American West fighting to conserve fish and wildlife on public lands. But Mr. Salvo thinks he knows an unlikely  —   and highly sympathetic  —   character to bring Kansans and others together around climate change: the lesser  . Known for its shock of yellow hair and bright orange cheeks, the lesser   once roamed the Great Plains. Today, though, the grouse is under threat  —   its populations reduced to isolated pockets in western Kansas, Colorado and the   Mexico border as its habitat succumbs to   drought, farming, drilling and other human activity. The group has been petitioning the Fish and Wildlife Service to relist the lesser   as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act. The bird found itself taken off the list after a lawsuit in 2014 backed by the oil and gas industry, which argues that any protective measures would mean added costs for energy developers. Mr. Salvo has found that to gain allies it doesn’t always help to start with the role climate change plays in harming the bird’s habitat. Instead, his movement has tried to find common ground, highlighting the historical heritage of the lesser  . In the “Little House on the Prairie” novels, Laura Ingalls Wilder wrote about eating   mush. Mr. Salvo also stresses how   practices can be good for farming, too, backing a federal program that provides financial aid to private landowners who adopt those practices. Leaving corn stubble standing after harvest gives the birds food and places to hide, for example, while also helping farmers protect the soil. “Sometimes, to gain allies, it helps to focus on issues of common concern, to support local economic development as well as species conservation,” he said. “It helps everybody come to the table. ” Last week, Mr. Palen, the farmer, was again talking weather  —   if not climate change  —   at a conference of   farmers  in Salina, Kan. Sessions included “Using Your Water Efficiently,” “Making Weather Work for You in 2017” and “Building Healthy Soil With Mob Grazing,” a practice that helps to fertilize the land. And yes, Mr. Palen says, he is on board with saving the lesser  . “I often think of ways I can protect their habitat,” he said. “I enjoy wildlife. ”

0 - Danny Cahill stood, slightly dazed, in a blizzard of confetti as the audience screamed and his family ran on stage. He had won Season 8 of NBC’s reality television show “The Biggest Loser,” shedding more weight than anyone ever had on the program  —   an astonishing 239 pounds in seven months. When he got on the scale for all to see that evening, Dec. 8, 2009, he weighed just 191 pounds, down from 430. Dressed in a   and   shorts, he was lean, athletic and as handsome as a model. “I’ve got my life back,” he declared. “I mean, I feel like a million bucks. ” Mr. Cahill left the show’s stage in Hollywood and flew directly to New York to start a triumphal tour of the talk shows, chatting with Jay Leno, Regis Philbin and Joy Behar. As he heard from fans all over the world, his elation knew no bounds. But in the years since, more than 100 pounds have crept back onto his    frame despite his best efforts. In fact, most of that season’s 16 contestants have regained much if not all the weight they lost so arduously. Some are even heavier now. Yet their experiences, while a bitter personal disappointment, have been a gift to science. A study of Season 8’s contestants has yielded surprising new discoveries about the physiology of obesity that help explain why so many people struggle unsuccessfully to keep off the weight they lose. Kevin Hall, a scientist at a federal research center who admits to a weakness for reality TV, had the idea to follow the “Biggest Loser” contestants for six years after that victorious night. The project was the first to measure what happened to people over as long as six years after they had lost large amounts of weight with intensive dieting and exercise. The results, the researchers said, were stunning. They showed just how hard the body fights back against weight loss. “It is frightening and amazing,” said Dr. Hall, an expert on metabolism at the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, which is part of the National Institutes of Health. “I am just blown away. ” It has to do with resting metabolism, which determines how many calories a person burns when at rest. When the show began, the contestants, though hugely overweight, had normal metabolisms for their size, meaning they were burning a normal number of calories for people of their weight. When it ended, their metabolisms had slowed radically and their bodies were not burning enough calories to maintain their thinner sizes. Researchers knew that just about anyone who deliberately loses weight  —   even if they start at a normal weight or even underweight  —   will have a slower metabolism when the diet ends. So they were not surprised to see that “The Biggest Loser” contestants had slow metabolisms when the show ended. What shocked the researchers was what happened next: As the years went by and the numbers on the scale climbed, the contestants’ metabolisms did not recover. They became even slower, and the pounds kept piling on. It was as if their bodies were intensifying their effort to pull the contestants back to their original weight. Mr. Cahill was one of the worst off. As he regained more than 100 pounds, his metabolism slowed so much that, just to maintain his current weight of 295 pounds, he now has to eat 800 calories a day less than a typical man his size. Anything more turns to fat. The struggles the contestants went through help explain why it has been so hard to make headway against the nation’s obesity problem, which afflicts more than a third of American adults. Despite spending billions of dollars on   drugs and dieting programs, even the most motivated are working against their own biology. Their experience shows that the body will fight back for years. And that, said Dr. Michael Schwartz, an obesity and diabetes researcher who is a professor of medicine at the University of Washington, is “new and important. ” “The key point is that you can be on TV, you can lose enormous amounts of weight, you can go on for six years, but you can’t get away from a basic biological reality,” said Dr. Schwartz, who was not involved in the study. “As long as you are below your initial weight, your body is going to try to get you back. ” The show’s doctor, Robert Huizenga, says he expected the contestants’ metabolic rates to fall just after the show, but was hoping for a smaller drop. He questioned, though, whether the measurements six years later were accurate. But maintaining weight loss is difficult, he said, which is why he tells contestants that they should exercise at least nine hours a week and monitor their diets to keep the weight off. “Unfortunately, many contestants are unable to find or afford adequate ongoing support with exercise doctors, psychologists, sleep specialists, and trainers  —   and that’s something we all need to work hard to change,” he said in an email. The study’s findings, to be published on Monday in the journal Obesity, are part of a scientific push to answer some of the most fundamental questions about obesity. Researchers are figuring out why being fat makes so many people develop diabetes and other medical conditions, and they are searching for new ways to block the poison in fat. They are starting to unravel the reasons bariatric surgery allows most people to lose significant amounts of weight when dieting so often fails. And they are looking afresh at medical care for obese people. The hope is that this work will eventually lead to new therapies that treat obesity as a chronic disease and can help keep weight under control for life. Most people who have tried to lose weight know how hard it is to keep the weight off, but many blame themselves when the pounds come back. But what obesity research has consistently shown is that dieters are at the mercy of their own bodies, which muster hormones and an altered metabolic rate to pull them back to their old weights, whether that is hundreds of pounds more or that extra 10 or 15 that many people are trying to keep off. There is always a weight a person’s body maintains without any effort. And while it is not known why that weight can change over the years  —   it may be an effect of aging  —   at any point, there is a weight that is easy to maintain, and that is the weight the body fights to defend. Finding a way to thwart these mechanisms is the goal scientists are striving for. First, though, they are trying to understand them in greater detail. Dr. David Ludwig, the director of the New Balance Foundation Obesity Prevention Center at Boston Children’s Hospital, who was not involved in the research, said the findings showed the need for new approaches to weight control. He cautioned that the study was limited by its small size and the lack of a control group of obese people who did not lose weight. But, he added, the findings made sense. “This is a subset of the most successful” dieters, he said. “If they don’t show a return to normal in metabolism, what hope is there for the rest of us?” Still, he added, “that shouldn’t be interpreted to mean we are doomed to battle our biology or remain fat. It means we need to explore other approaches. ” Some scientists say weight maintenance has to be treated as an issue separate from weight loss. Only when that challenge is solved, they say, can progress truly be made against obesity. “There is a lot of basic research we still need to do,” said Dr. Margaret Jackson, who is directing a project at Pfizer. Her group is testing a drug that, in animals at least, acts like leptin, a hormone that controls hunger. With weight loss, leptin levels fall and people become hungry. The idea is to trick the brains of people who have lost weight so they do not become ravenous for lack of leptin. While many of the contestants kept enough weight off to improve their health and became more physically active, the low weights they strived to keep eluded all but one of them: Erinn Egbert, a   caregiver for her mother in Versailles, Ky. And she struggles mightily to keep the pounds off because her metabolism burns 552 fewer calories a day than would be expected for someone her size. “What people don’t understand is that a treat is like a drug,” said Ms. Egbert, who went from 263 pounds to just under 176 on the show, and now weighs between 152 and 157. “Two treats can turn into a binge over a   period. That is what I struggle with. ” Six years after Season 8 ended, 14 of the 16 contestants went to the N. I. H. last fall for three days of testing. The researchers were concerned that the contestants might try to frantically lose weight before coming in, so they shipped equipment to them that would measure their physical activity and weight before their visit, and had the information sent remotely to the N. I. H. The contestants received their metabolic results last week. They were shocked, but on further reflection, decided the numbers explained a lot. “All my friends were drinking beer and not gaining massive amounts of weight,” Mr. Cahill said. “The moment I started drinking beer, there goes another 20 pounds. I said, ‘This is not right. Something is wrong with my body. ’” Sean Algaier, 36, a pastor from Charlotte, N. C. feels cheated. He went from 444 pounds to 289 as a contestant on the show. Now his weight is up to 450 again, and he is burning 458 fewer calories a day than would be expected for a man his size. “It’s kind of like hearing you have a life sentence,” he said. Slower metabolisms were not the only reason the contestants regained weight, though. They constantly battled hunger, cravings and binges. The investigators found at least one reason: plummeting levels of leptin. The contestants started out with normal levels of leptin. By the season’s finale, they had almost no leptin at all, which would have made them ravenous all the time. As their weight returned, their leptin levels drifted up again, but only to about half of what they had been when the season began, the researchers found, thus helping to explain their urges to eat. Leptin is just one of a cluster of hormones that control hunger, and although Dr. Hall and his colleagues did not measure the rest of them, another group of researchers, in a different project, did. In a   study funded by Australia’s National Health and Medical Research Council, Dr. Joseph Proietto of the University of Melbourne and his colleagues recruited 50 overweight people who agreed to consume just 550 calories a day for eight or nine weeks. They lost an average of nearly 30 pounds, but over the next year, the pounds started coming back. Dr. Proietto and his colleagues looked at leptin and four other hormones that satiate people. Levels of most of them fell in their study subjects. They also looked at a hormone that makes people want to eat. Its level rose. “What was surprising was what a coordinated effect it is,” Dr. Proietto said. “The body puts multiple mechanisms in place to get you back to your weight. The only way to maintain weight loss is to be hungry all the time. We desperately need agents that will suppress hunger and that are safe with   use. ” Mr. Cahill, 46, said his weight problem began when he was in the third grade. He got fat, then fatter. He would starve himself, and then eat a whole can of cake frosting with a spoon. Afterward, he would cower in the pantry off the kitchen, feeling overwhelmed with shame. Over the years, his insatiable urge to eat kept overcoming him, and his weight climbed: 370 pounds, 400, 460, 485. “I used to look at myself and think, ‘I am horrible, I am a monster, subhuman,’” he said. He began sleeping in a recliner because he was too heavy to sleep lying down. Walking hurt stairs were agony. Buying clothes with a 68 waist was humiliating. “I remember sitting in a dressing room one day, and nothing would fit. I looked at the traffic outside on the street and thought, ‘I should just run out in front of a car. ’” He eventually seized on “The Biggest Loser” as his best chance to lose enough weight to live a normal life. He tried three times and was finally selected. Before the show began, the contestants underwent medical tests to be sure they could endure the rigorous schedule that lay ahead. And rigorous it was. Sequestered on the “Biggest Loser” ranch with the other contestants, Mr. Cahill exercised seven hours a day, burning 8, 000 to 9, 000 calories according to a calorie tracker the show gave him. He took electrolyte tablets to help replace the salts he lost through sweating, consuming many fewer calories than before. Eventually, he and the others were sent home for four months to try to keep losing weight on their own. Mr. Cahill set a goal of a   deficit per day. The idea was to lose a pound a day. He quit his job as a land surveyor to do it. His routine went like this: Wake up at 5 a. m. and run on a treadmill for 45 minutes. Have breakfast  —   typically one egg and two egg whites, half a grapefruit and a piece of sprouted grain toast. Run on the treadmill for another 45 minutes. Rest for 40 minutes bike ride nine miles to a gym. Work out for two and a half hours. Shower, ride home, eat lunch  —   typically a grilled skinless chicken breast, a cup of broccoli and 10 spears of asparagus. Rest for an hour. Drive to the gym for another round of exercise. If he had not burned enough calories to hit his goal, he went back to the gym after dinner to work out some more. At times, he found himself running around his neighborhood in the dark until his   indicator reset to zero at midnight. On the day of the   on the show’s finale, Mr. Cahill and the others dressed carefully to hide the rolls of loose skin that remained, to their surprise and horror, after they had lost weight. They wore compression undergarments to hold it in. Mr. Cahill knew he could not maintain his finale weight of 191 pounds. He was so mentally and physically exhausted he barely moved for two weeks after his publicity tour ended. But he had started a new career giving motivational speeches as the biggest loser ever, and for the next four years, he managed to keep his weight below 255 pounds by exercising two to three hours a day. But two years ago, he went back to his job as a surveyor, and the pounds started coming back. Soon the scale hit 265. Mr. Cahill started weighing and measuring his food again and stepped up his exercise. He got back down to 235 to 240 pounds. But his weight edged up again, to 275, then 295. His slow metabolism is part of the problem, and so are his food cravings. He opens a bag of chips, thinking he will have just a few. “I’d eat five bites. Then I’d black out and eat the whole bag of chips and say, ‘What did I do? ’” Dr. Lee Kaplan, an obesity researcher at Harvard, says the brain sets the number of calories we consume, and it can be easy for people to miss that how much they eat matters less than the fact that their bodies want to hold on to more of those calories. Dr. Michael Rosenbaum, an obesity researcher at Columbia University who has collaborated with Dr. Hall in previous studies, said the body’s systems for regulating how many calories are consumed and how many are burned are tightly coupled when people are not strenuously trying to lose weight or to maintain a significant weight loss. Still, pounds can insidiously creep on. “We eat about 900, 000 to a million calories a year, and burn them all except those annoying 3, 000 to 5, 000 calories that result in an average annual weight gain of about one to two pounds,” he said. “These very small differences between intake and output average out to only about 10 to 20 calories per day  —   less than one Starburst candy  —   but the cumulative consequences over time can be devastating. ” “It is not clear whether this small imbalance and the resultant weight gain that most of us experience as we age are the consequences of changes in lifestyle, the environment or just the biology of aging,” Dr. Rosenbaum added. The effects of small imbalances between calories eaten and calories burned are more pronounced when people deliberately lose weight, Dr. Hall said. Yes, there are signals to regain weight, but he wondered how many extra calories people were driven to eat. He found a way to figure that out. He analyzed data from a clinical trial in which people took a diabetes drug, canagliflozin, that makes them spill 360 calories a day into their urine, or took a placebo. The drug has no known effect on the brain, and the person does not realize those calories are being spilled. Those taking the drug gradually lost weight. But for every five pounds they lost, they were, without realizing it, eating an additional 200 calories a day. Those extra calories, Dr. Hall said, were a bigger driver of weight regained than the slowing of the metabolism. And, he added, if people fought the urge to eat those calories, they would be hungry. “Unless they continue to fight it constantly, they will regain the weight,” he said. All this does not mean that modest weight loss is hopeless, experts say. Individuals respond differently to diet manipulations  —     or   diets, for example  —   and to exercise and   drugs, among other interventions. But Dr. Ludwig said that simply cutting calories was not the answer. “There are no doubt exceptional individuals who can ignore primal biological signals and maintain weight loss for the long term by restricting calories,” he said, but he added that “for most people, the combination of incessant hunger and slowing metabolism is a recipe for weight regain  —   explaining why so few individuals can maintain weight loss for more than a few months. ” Dr. Rosenbaum agreed. “The difficulty in keeping weight off reflects biology, not a pathological lack of willpower affecting   of the U. S. A. ,” he said. Mr. Cahill knows that now. And with his report from Dr. Hall’s group showing just how much his metabolism had slowed, he stopped blaming himself for his weight gain. “That shame that was on my shoulders went off,” he said.

0 - On the night of Nov. 16, a group of executives gathered in a private dining room of the restaurant La Chine at the Waldorf Astoria hotel in Midtown Manhattan. The table was laden with Chinese delicacies and $2, 100 bottles of Château Lafite Rothschild. At one end sat Wu Xiaohui, the chairman of the Waldorf’s owner, Anbang Insurance Group, a Chinese financial behemoth with estimated assets of $285 billion and an ownership structure shrouded in mystery. Close by sat Jared Kushner, a major New York real estate investor whose    Donald J. Trump, had just been elected president of the United States. It was a mutually auspicious moment. Mr. Wu and Mr. Kushner  —   who is married to Mr. Trump’s daughter Ivanka and is one of his closest advisers  —   were nearing agreement on a joint venture in Manhattan: the redevelopment of 666 Fifth Avenue, the fading crown jewel of the Kushner family   empire. Anbang, which has close ties to the Chinese state, has seen its aggressive efforts to buy up hotels in the United States slowed amid concerns raised by Obama administration officials who review foreign investments for national security risk. Now, according to two people with knowledge of the   Mr. Wu toasted Mr. Trump and declared his desire to meet the   whose ascension, he was sure, would be good for global business. Since the election, intense scrutiny has been trained on Mr. Trump’s company and the potential conflicts of interest he will face. But with Mr. Kushner laying the groundwork for his own White House role, the meeting at the Waldorf shines a light on his family’s   business, Kushner Companies, and on the ethical thicket he would have to navigate while advising his    on policy that could affect his bottom line. Unlike the Trump Organization, which has shifted its focus from acquisition to branding of the Trump name, the Kushner family business, led by Mr. Kushner, is a major real estate investor across the New York area and beyond. The company has participated in roughly $7 billion in acquisitions in the last decade, many of them backed by opaque foreign money, as well as financial institutions Mr. Kushner’s    will soon have a hand in regulating. The Anbang talks, which have not previously been reported, began roughly six months ago  —   “Well before the  ’s victory,” Mr. Kushner’s spokeswoman, Risa Heller, noted. That was, however, just as Mr. Trump clinched the Republican nomination. While the talks are far along, representatives for Mr. Kushner said some points remained unresolved. Ms. Heller declined to outline the financial terms under discussion. Mr. Kushner, who declined to be interviewed for this article, has hired a leading Washington law firm, WilmerHale, to advise him on how to comply with federal ethics laws should he join the White House staff as an adviser to the president. The firm has concluded that one potential sticking point, a federal   law, is not applicable, though not all ethics experts agree. While the law prohibits federal officials from hiring relatives for agencies they lead, Mr. Kushner’s lawyers argue, among other things, that the White House is not an agency and is therefore exempt. As for conflicts of interest, Mr. Kushner would be required to make limited financial disclosures, which could give the public a clearer picture of his holdings. And, unlike Mr. Trump, who as president will be exempt from    laws, he would have to recuse himself from decisions with a “direct and predictable effect” on his financial interests. Jamie S. Gorelick, a WilmerHale partner who served in the Clinton administration, said that while plans were not final, Mr. Kushner was taking significant steps to extricate himself from the family business. “Mr. Kushner is committed to complying with federal ethics laws, and we have been consulting with the Office of Government Ethics regarding the steps he would take,” she said. He will resign as chief executive of Kushner Companies, and though the law does not require it, she said he would divest “substantial assets. ” She did not name them, but Ms. Heller said they would include his stake in 666 Fifth Avenue. Just how meaningful that plan is remains to be seen. Mr. Kushner’s representatives declined to detail his personal financial interest in Kushner Companies’ properties, and they said he intended to keep his interest in other properties beyond 666 Fifth Avenue. He also has a stake, through a family investment vehicle, in a private equity firm run by his brother, Joshua, with   investments of its own. Mr. Kushner, who turns 36 on Tuesday, has emerged as one of the most powerful figures in Mr. Trump’s orbit. Already he is involved in steering policy, making personnel choices and serving as the middleman between foreign leaders, the White House and the   in ways that could affect his business, even as companies like Anbang see opportunity in entering into new ventures with the  ’s   . Mr. Kushner played a pivotal role in persuading Mr. Trump, who made the Wall Street powerhouse Goldman Sachs a bête noire of his presidential campaign, to appoint the firm’s president, Gary D. Cohn, as his chief economic adviser, according to several people involved in the transition. (Like a number of people interviewed for this article, they spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss internal matters.) Goldman Sachs has lent the Kushner Companies money and is an investor in a real estate technology company   by Mr. Kushner and his brother. Mr. Trump has said that his    an Orthodox Jew, will play a central role in dealings with Israel, describing him as so talented that he could help “do peace in the Middle East. ” Mr. Kushner’s company has received multiple loans from Israel’s largest bank, Bank Hapoalim. The incoming Trump administration will inherit a Justice Department investigation into allegations that the bank helped wealthy Americans evade taxes. Indeed, despite a lack of foreign policy experience, Mr. Kushner is emerging as an important figure at a crucial moment for some of America’s most complicated diplomatic relationships. Such is his influence in the geopolitical realm that transition officials have told the Obama White House that foreign policy matters that need to be brought to Mr. Trump’s attention should be relayed through his    according to a person close to the transition and a government official with direct knowledge of the arrangement. So when the Chinese ambassador to the United States called the White House in early December to express what one official called China’s “deep displeasure” at Mr. Trump’s break with longstanding diplomatic tradition by speaking by phone with the president of Taiwan, the White House did not call the  ’s national security team. Instead, it relayed that information through Mr. Kushner, whose company was not only in the midst of discussions with Anbang but also has Chinese investors. Ethics experts said that while the    law is narrowly drawn, Mr. Kushner’s mix of roles leads inevitably to ethical questions. Matthew T. Sanderson, a lawyer at Caplin  Drysdale and former general counsel to Senator Rand Paul’s presidential campaign, said deals like the one with Anbang “might not be illegal under the    rules, but raise a strong appearance that a foreign entity is using Mr. Kushner’s business to try to influence U. S. policy. ” Without knowing details of Mr. Kushner’s holdings and divestiture plans, he said, the merits of his proposal are hard to assess. Even if he divests his stake in certain properties, Mr. Sanderson added, “it strikes me as a  ” that “still poses a real    issue and would be a drag on Mr. Trump’s presidency and cause the American people to question Mr. Kushner’s role in policy making. ” Like the   Mr. Kushner built on the fortune of a successful father. In the 1980s, his father, Charles Kushner, took over the New   construction business started by his own father, a Holocaust survivor from Poland. Charles expanded into office buildings and apartments, eventually assembling a $1 billion real estate business and becoming a leading Democratic donor, contributing to politicians in New Jersey and New York and winning appointment to the board of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. But the company was upended when Charles became engulfed in a nasty family feud over how the business’s proceeds were to be distributed. The fight, which played out in a federal courthouse in Newark, resulted in a plea deal for Charles, who in 2005 was sentenced to two years in prison for tax evasion, witness tampering and making illegal campaign donations. The family infighting was so bitter that, at one point, Charles hired a prostitute to seduce his    videotaped the encounter and sent the footage to his sister. Jared, 23 at the time of his father’s conviction, had recently graduated from Harvard. He was studying for an M. B. A. and law degree at New York University in 2006 when he bought The New York Observer, at the time an influential weekly newspaper known for its coverage of the city’s elite and   real estate. It is unclear exactly when he assumed control of the family business. The company now says he became chief executive in 2008, but contemporaneous news accounts rarely describe him that way until 2012. Nevertheless, Mr. Kushner quickly became the company’s public face as it expanded across the Hudson River into Manhattan, much as Mr. Trump had left Queens for the big city decades before. Charles Kushner was released from federal custody in August 2006. He immediately resumed a significant role in the business and remains heavily involved today. Still, it was with Jared as headliner that the company soon made its biggest play ever: $1. 8 billion for the skyscraper at 666 Fifth Avenue that would remain at the center of its story to this day. It was the highest price ever paid for a single office building in the United States  —   and more than three times what its seller had paid six years earlier. Around this time, Mr. Kushner met the woman he would marry: Ivanka Trump. “” the headlines blared, as the New York tabloids celebrated a match made in real estate heaven. Everything was looking up, until suddenly it wasn’t. Within a year after the deal, the overheated lending market seized up and Kushner Companies struggled to repay its considerable loans  —   and to hold on to 666 Fifth Avenue. To the rescue over the next few years came the Carlyle Group, a giant private equity firm Vornado Realty Trust, then a   of two of Mr. Trump’s largest properties and Inditex, owner of Zara, the fashion retailer founded by Amancio Ortega, the Spanish tycoon who is one of the world’s wealthiest men. In the end, Mr. Kushner’s company survived, and he and Ms. Trump became fixtures on the international   circuit. In August, they were spotted with Wendi Deng, an   of Rupert Murdoch, on the   yacht Rising Sun, owned by the entertainment mogul David Geffen. Several weeks later, they were photographed watching the United States Open tennis finals with the art collector Dasha Zhukova, wife of the Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich, a member of President Vladimir V. Putin’s inner circle. Since 2012, Kushner Companies has been on a buying spree. It has acquired at least 120 properties, mostly a mix of existing commercial and residential buildings in New York and New Jersey, according to data compiled by Real Capital Analytics, a research firm. Recent deals include the $340 million acquisition of the Jehovah’s Witnesses’ headquarters in the shadow of the Brooklyn Bridge, and $345 million for a nearby plot of undeveloped land. Mr. Kushner’s company also bought several floors of the old New York Times building for $295 million in 2015 from Lev Leviev, an Israeli who is chairman of one of the largest real estate development companies in Russia. Increasingly, the company is branching out across the country  —   to Philadelphia Baltimore Toledo, Ohio and Kansas City, Mo. In Chicago, it owns the building that houses the Midwest headquarters of ATT. In all, the company owns more than 20, 000 apartments and approximately 14 million square feet of office space. As the Kushners have expanded their businesses, they have also, by necessity, expanded their universe of investors and creditors. Lenders have included private equity giants like Blackstone, the French bank Natixis and Goldman Sachs. Another lender is Deutsche Bank, which recently reached a $7. 2 billion settlement with the Justice Department over its sale of toxic mortgage securities. But it remains under investigation over allegations that it disguised trades that helped Russian clients move money offshore. Beyond real estate, Mr. Kushner has moved into the Wall Street, health care and tech spaces. He has an indirect investment in Thrive Capital, a venture capital firm valued at about $1. 5 billion that is run by his brother, Joshua. The company has made more than 100 investments in dozens of companies, both in the United States and abroad. Among them is Oscar, a health insurance company founded in 2012 to take advantage of the Affordable Care Act, which Mr. Trump has vowed to dismantle. Oscar’s investors have included Li   who is one of Hong Kong’s richest men, and China’s Ping An Insurance, which has close ties to relatives of former Prime Minister Wen Jiabao of China. The Kushner brothers have counted the Russian billionaire tech investor Yuri Milner and the Chinese billionaire founder of Alibaba, Jack Ma, as investors in another endeavor  —   Cadre, a   real estate investment company they started with a friend. Goldman Sachs has invested in both tech ventures. But the money behind many of Mr. Kushner’s   investments remains a mystery. While the company lists dozens of partners on its website, it does not disclose the individuals behind those companies. One of the newest Kushner projects  —   a   luxury apartment tower that opened in November in Jersey City  —   got nearly a quarter of its financing, about $50 million, from Chinese investors who are not publicly identified. The investors are beneficiaries of a federal program that grants   visas and a path to permanent residency in exchange for investments of $500, 000. The program, known as   has become popular with real estate developers as a cheap form of financing in fiscal year 2015, the State Department issued 9, 764 of the visas  —   overwhelmingly to applicants from China. But the program, which must be renewed periodically by Congress, has lately come under fire. The Government Accountability Office has issued several reports raising concerns about what it termed the program’s insufficient background checks and lax safeguards against illicit financing. One applicant, the agency found, failed to report potential financial ties to a string of Chinese brothels. Then there are the Kushners’ continuing negotiations with Anbang’s Mr. Wu, one of the most politically connected men in China. In 2015, Mr. Kushner began pursuing a grand vision for 666 Fifth Avenue. The renowned architect Zaha Hadid was asked to come up with a design to resculpt the       office building, adding apartments, a hotel and a mall and nearly tripling its height to 1, 400 feet. But the plan needed money, and while Mr. Kushner had managed to hang on to his family’s flagship building, it still had a lot of debt, with a $1. 1 billion loan coming due in 2019, and a good portion of the commercial office space vacant. Anbang, which got its start as an auto insurance company in 2004, had become one of the most aggressive Chinese buyers of United States real estate, and had begun investing in hotels. But it had encountered problems of its own its byzantine ownership structure had given rise to concern on Wall Street and in Washington. The Times reported last year that Anbang is owned by a few dozen companies, which in turn are owned by a number of shell companies that are controlled by roughly 100 people, many of whom have ties to a county in China that is the home of Mr. Wu, whose own power stems in part from marriage. In his case he married Zhuo Ran, a granddaughter of Deng Xiaoping, the leader who brought China out of the chaos of the Mao era. Mr. Wu also counts as a central business partner the son of a People’s Liberation Army marshal, and he has recruited several former government insurance regulators to serve on his board. Anbang’s structure has stoked such suspicion about its true ownership that some Wall Street firms, including Morgan Stanley, have opted not to advise the company on United States mergers and acquisitions because they cannot get the information needed to satisfy their “know your client” guidelines. Anbang’s deep ties to the Chinese state have also led to a break in presidential protocol. Presidents have long stayed at the Waldorf, but when Mr. Obama visited New York for the opening of a session of the United Nations General Assembly in September 2015, he decided to seek other accommodations. American officials were vague about the reasons for the change at the time a senior national security official cited security, counterintelligence and cybersurveillance concerns. National security concerns have also complicated Anbang’s efforts to acquire other properties in the United States. One deal, to buy the Hotel del Coronado in San Diego, fell apart in October amid concerns from the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, which comprises the heads of nine federal agencies and is charged with reviewing the national security risks of transactions involving foreign governments or   companies. The Hotel del Coronado is near a naval base, and deals involving proximity to national security infrastructure typically receive heightened scrutiny. Anbang was, however, able to acquire the other hotels in the same collection. Last year, Anbang tried to purchase the Starwood Hotels chain, outbidding Marriott with a $14 billion offer. It was widely reported that the deal would be subject to review by the committee. But though the parties expressed confidence that it would pass muster, ultimately Anbang walked away from the deal before submitting the kind of detailed inside information that process would entail. And while Anbang’s planned $1. 57 billion purchase of Des   Fidelity  Guaranty Life, first announced in November 2015, was cleared by the committee, also known as Cfius, it stalled after the New York State Department of Financial Services demanded more information about Anbang’s shareholding structure. But Anbang was nothing if not savvy. Company officials had cultivated a relationship with Benjamin M. Lawsky, who had earlier led the financial services agency, from May 2011 to June 2015. It was Mr. Lawsky, by then a consultant, who introduced Anbang to Kushner Companies, according to people with knowledge of how the discussions came about. Mr. Lawsky declined to comment. Mr. Kushner led the negotiations, his spokeswoman, Ms. Heller, confirmed. Kushner Companies would disclose little else about the joint venture, except to say that Anbang would become one of the equity partners in the building’s redevelopment if an agreement is finalized. Anbang declined to comment. It was just coincidence that Mr. Kushner’s Nov. 16 dinner at the Waldorf with Mr. Wu took place the week after the election, Ms. Heller said, adding that it had been in the works for a while. By the time of the meeting, Mr. Kushner had decided to hand off certain business relationships, including the one with Anbang, to others at Kushner Companies, according to Ms. Heller, and it was for that reason that he invited his father and Laurent Morali, the president of Kushner Companies. She said he planned to sell his stake in 666 Fifth before the closing of any Anbang deal, but she declined to name the potential buyers or the price Mr. Kushner hoped to get. Ms. Heller stressed in her statement that the United States has “not found Anbang to be a   enterprise”  —   an important technical point, given that the Constitution’s Emoluments Clause prohibits the acceptance of payments and gifts from foreign governments. Should it consummate its deal with Anbang, she said, Kushner Companies will seek any necessary approvals from the federal government. She expressed confidence that any deal would pass muster with the foreign investment committee, citing the fact that it did not block the Chinese company from buying the Waldorf Astoria. Come Jan. 20, when Mr. Trump is scheduled to be inaugurated, that committee will be made up of his cabinet members, and the process is such that the president has the final say. It is a process with which Mr. Trump has some familiarity. During the campaign, he repeatedly criticized Hillary Clinton for supporting, as secretary of state and member of the foreign investment committee, a deal that benefited donors to her family’s charitable foundation while giving the Russians control of about 20 percent of America’s   capacity. On China, Mr. Trump has talked a tough game, accusing Beijing of currency manipulation and raising the possibility of a trade war. But whether that is only a negotiating tactic remains to be seen. The   has his own financial entanglements with China: He owns a 30 percent stake in a partnership that owes roughly $950 million to a group of lenders that includes the Bank of China, and one of his biggest tenants at Trump Tower is another   bank, the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China. With Anbang a magnet for controversy, Mr. Kushner has kept the negotiations under wraps. But a week after the Nov. 16 dinner at the Waldorf, Mr. Kushner’s father and Mr. Wu met at the hotel for lunch. After the elder Mr. Kushner departed, Mr. Wu was clearly elated. “I love you guys,” he exclaimed in English to his remaining entourage, according to one person present.

0 - It happened one night in the late summer of 1954. Jules Schulback, a New York furrier and taker of home movies, heard that Marilyn Monroe would be on the Upper East Side of Manhattan filming scenes again for her new picture, “The Seven Year Itch. ” Two days earlier, Mr. Schulback had taken footage of her with his   Bolex movie camera around the corner from his townhouse apartment. So he grabbed the camera  —   the one usually used for family picnics and parades and the stuff of everyday life  —   and headed over to the subway grate in front of Wright’s Food shop, just down the street from the   movie theater on Lexington Avenue and 52nd Street. Though it was around 1 a. m. a large crowd had already gathered, mostly newspaper photographers and curious men waiting to see Marilyn. The movie studio and the director, Billy Wilder, had counted on this, inviting the press and the public to drum up buzz for the new movie, which starred Ms. Monroe as “the Girl Upstairs,” who entices a   executive, played by Tom Ewell, while his wife is away with the kids for the summer. In the famous street scene, the two are leaving the movies as Ms. Monroe pauses over a grate to enjoy the breeze from the subway as it blows up her dress on a hot summer night. “Isn’t it delicious?” she purrs. The breeze came from a large fan under the grate operated by the film’s special effects chief. The night  —   Sept. 15  —   was actually quite chilly. But the stunt worked. It became known as “the shot seen around the world. ” But there was a dark subtext to the comedy. Gathered at that late hour were hundreds of gawkers, almost all men, who catcalled and yelled things like, “Higher! Higher!” as Ms. Monroe’s dress blew up over her head. For two hours, the men watched from surrounding buildings and from the street. “Unfortunately, one of them was her husband, Joe DiMaggio,” Mr. Wilder is quoted as saying in his biography, “Nobody’s Perfect. ” “And he didn’t like what he saw, or what everyone else was seeing. ” Mr. DiMaggio hadn’t planned on visiting the set that night, and was waiting for his wife at the St. Regis Hotel, where the couple were staying. But the columnist Walter Winchell had persuaded him to come along. Ms. Monroe was not happy her husband had shown up. But he was even more unhappy and angrily stormed off. Later that night the couple had a screaming fight in their room. The next morning, her hairdresser covered up Ms. Monroe’s bruises with makeup. Three weeks later, Ms. Monroe filed for divorce. Mr. Wilder never used the Lexington Avenue footage and reshot the scene on a closed lot in Hollywood, though photographs of that night appeared everywhere. Except for some brief, grainy shots from a newsreel covering the divorce, footage from that night was never screened. “The footage immediately disappeared,” Mr. Wilder said in the biography. “But one day I’m sure some film scholar will dig it up. ” The story of the night Marilyn Monroe’s white   dress blew up was well known among Jules Schulback’s children, and even among his grandchildren. His granddaughter Bonnie Siegler said he bragged from time to time about his personal film shoot with Marilyn. “He was a real raconteur,” said Ms. Siegler, a graphic designer who runs her own company, Eight and a Half. “I didn’t know if the story was real. ” But even though she had never seen it, she often told people that her grandfather had footage of Marilyn Monroe on the subway grate. Ms. Siegler’s older sister, Rayna Dineen, said her grandfather, whom they called Opi (a German term of endearment) was rarely without his camera. “He would be filming everywhere, all the time. ” There were reels of vacations, family picnics, birthday parties and bar mitzvahs. He had even filmed a   day in the life of his daughters, depicting them waking up, brushing their teeth and going to school. “But the Marilyn story was one of his favorite stories to tell,” Ms. Dineen said. It was just one of dozens of amazing tales. Mr. Schulback had a long, technicolorful life, one so filled with drama that his Monroe story sometimes seemed like a footnote. In 1938, Mr. Schulback had argued with his family in Germany that Adolf Hitler was much more dangerous than anyone thought. According to Ms. Siegler, his family believed that Hitler’s hate speech was simply rhetoric, and that he wouldn’t act on anything he was saying. Mr. Schulback, 25 at the time, urged them to pack their bags and leave Berlin with him. But they resisted, opting to wait and see how things developed, never imagining the horror that awaited them and millions of other European Jews. Mr. Schulback was not taking any chances. In 1938, Jews immigrating to the United States needed a sponsor, someone to take financial responsibility for them. Mr. Schulback sold everything he had, bought an expensive suit, booked passage on the Queen Mary, reserved a room at the Plaza and headed to America to find a sponsor for him and his wife, Edith, and their daughter Helen, who was then a toddler. “He was like: ‘I’m your lost, rich relative. I won’t be a burden.’ But he had no money. He played it,” Ms. Siegler said. He secured a signature, then returned to collect his family, but was stopped trying to enter Nazi Germany by a suspicious border guard. Knowing the Germans were big fans of the 1934 Clark Gable hit, “It Happened One Night,” Mr. Schulback told the guard he was the distributor for Mr. Gable’s new movie. He claimed that if he couldn’t enter the country, neither would the film. “The guy was like, ‘Oh, we love Clark Gable,’ and waved him through,” Ms. Siegler said. Mr. Schulback grabbed Edith and Helen, again imploring his other relatives to leave, and escaped back to the United States with a few suitcases, claiming to the Nazi immigration officers that his family was going on vacation. The date was Nov. 8, the day before Kristallnacht. In Berlin, he had been a furrier, and his shop was destroyed that night. His remaining family  —   four sisters, parents and    —   would all perish in the Holocaust. The United States was good to Mr. Schulback. He and his family lived a happy, successful life in New York, much of it preserved in his home movies. As a child, Ms. Siegler loved going to her grandfather’s Upper East Side apartment not just because of his great stories and sense of humor, but also because he lived opposite the New York Doll Hospital. From his apartment window, she could see the buckets of doll eyes and doll arms. “It was really intense,” she said. When Edith had a stroke in the 1970s, she was given only a few weeks to live. But Mr. Schulback, always a man of action, refused to let his wife die in the hospital and took her home. The couple moved into the   apartment of a building around the corner, and Mr. Schulback became her nurse. “Half her body was paralyzed, she couldn’t speak,” Ms. Siegler said. “But he loved her and took care of her for 26 years until she finally died. ” After 35 years in that same apartment, Mr. Schulback  —   who had been president of the 61st Street Block Association  —   was forced to leave. The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation had bought the townhouse where he lived and the one behind it and wanted to reconfigure the property. So Ms. Siegler and her husband, Jeff Scher, helped move her    grandfather to a new place on the other side of Central Park. In 2004, in the arduous packing up of Mr. Schulback’s home, the couple came across a big stash of film. It was stored in a back room that the family called “Opi’s fur room,” where Mr. Schulback had once assembled garments from animal pelts for his business. “No one ever wanted to go back there,” Ms. Siegler said. “But when we went in, we found this plastic bag filled with just tons of film, home movies, bought movies and everything mixed together. ” Ms. Siegler’s husband, an experimental filmmaker, couldn’t wait to screen the films. He was particularly interested in seeing whether Marilyn and the subway grate footage actually existed. “It was like this family myth,” Mr. Scher said. “So long rumored and never confirmed. ” The same was true for its source material. For decades, innuendo swirled around the Lexington Avenue shoot for “The Seven Year Itch. ” Ms. Monroe and Mr. DiMaggio had married that January and had already had a bumpy ride, the Yankee Clipper enraged by her exhibitionism and by rumors of infidelity, according to Lois W. Banner, the author of the 2012 biography “Marilyn: The Passion and the Paradox. ” “She was having an affair with her musical director at the time, and everyone knew about it in the business,” said Dr. Banner, a professor emeritus of history and gender studies at the University of Southern California. So before he even arrived on set, there was tension. “DiMaggio,” Dr. Banner said, “was not happy with Marilyn. ” There are several theories as to why the footage from that night was never used. Some believe the Manhattan shoot was done purely as a publicity stunt, which was made even more sensational when Mr. DiMaggio showed up. Some biographers say the enthusiastic crowd was just too noisy, making the film unusable. A third theory was that the footage was too risqué and Ms. Monroe wanted to shoot a more demure version, so as not to further infuriate her husband. There was even talk at the time that she wasn’t wearing any underwear. Mr. Wilder tried to put those rumors to rest in his biography. She had put on not just one, but two sets of underwear, he said. Dr. Banner said all three reasons quite likely played into the final decision to reshoot. “But the photographs of that night had gone viral by the time the film was being put together,” she said, “and played a great role in her fame. ” The   scene used in the finished film is incredibly brief and tame. The image many people have of that moment comes from the press shots and publicity stills in New York, and not from the finished movie. Back in the pelt room of Mr. Schulback’s apartment, Mr. Scher excitedly gathered up the old metal film canisters. None were labeled, Mr. Scher recalled. Some of the film was off the reel and sitting there like big balls of spaghetti, as if there had been a projector mishap years ago. Later that night in his studio in the couple’s apartment on West 16th Street, Mr. Scher slowly and carefully wound the film, since some of it was very brittle and in danger of breaking. He did a few repairs and then began looking at it using a light box, spooling it from reel to reel by hand. There were about 50 rolls of   film and around 75 rolls of 8 millimeter. There were the family outings and parades. The birthdays and bar mitzvahs. And there, amid the mundane scenes of precious everyday life, was Marilyn Monroe, in crisp, colorful Kodachrome. “This stuff just popped out,” Mr. Scher said. “It was real! Preserved like the home movies are, too. Just these moments in time. ” Mr. Scher could clearly see the actress’s dress billowing up. “Like a parachute with a pair of legs attached,” he said. “It was startling. Like seeing a myth materialize. ” It was a shadow version of lost footage amid home movies of a family that almost certainly wouldn’t have existed had the Schulbacks stayed in Germany. Mr. Scher called out to his wife: “It’s really here!” They watched all 3 minutes 17 seconds in amazement. “There was something so magical about it,” Ms. Siegler said. “For years I didn’t know if it was real. I certainly didn’t believe it wholeheartedly. And there it was. It was like the end of the story. ” The film starts with a   intertitle that reads “World Premiere,” Mr. Schulback’s little inside joke. And then there is Marilyn Monroe, in a white terry robe, coming down the stoop of a   building at 164 East 61st Street, between Lexington and Third Avenues. It was the earlier scene  —   before the subway grate footage  —   that Mr. Schulback had shot. Cameramen and press photographers are gathered outside as the actress smiles and waves. Cut to Ms. Monroe in a   window wearing a slip and   her hair. Mr. Ewell walks down the street and into the building. The film cuts inexplicably to 30 seconds of what must be a Shriners parade in Manhattan, then jumps to another intertitle, which reads “Our Baby. ” And suddenly, there is Ms. Monroe again, this time on the subway grate in that famously fluttering white dress, holding a matching white clutch in her right hand and a     scarf in her left. Mr. Schulback was incredibly close, filming right behind Mr. Wilder’s shoulder, stopping to wind his   camera every 25 seconds. Now and then, a silhouette of the director’s arm intrudes into Mr. Schulback’s   shot. At one point Mr. Wilder, in a fedora, passes across the frame. Ms. Monroe gets into position and yawns, while the cinematographer sets up the camera. Through a gap in the film crew, Mr. Schulback captures just her face, looking off to the left, serious and unsmiling. Then Mr. Ewell is there, chatting with Ms. Monroe, who pushes him into position. The dress flutters again, Ms. Monroe holds it down, bending slightly, smiling and talking to Mr. Ewell, but it flutters up some more and she laughs, her head thrown back. It blows up again, but she doesn’t push it down this time, and it flies up over her head, clearly revealing two pairs of underwear that, because of the bright lights, do not protect Ms. Monroe’s modesty quite as much as she might have liked. Then, as suddenly as she appeared, Marilyn is gone, and the film reverts to   mode: Edith Schulback walking on the grass at a family outing in the country. It’s like being shaken from some crazy dream, back to reality. Interest in that moment in film history from more than 50 years ago endures. The new movie musical starring Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone, “La La Land,” makes brief filmic reference to it in the opening number, with a young dancer’s yellow dress blowing up. And a Snickers commercial from the Super Bowl last year stars Willem Dafoe, Eugene Levy and a   Monroe on the famous set. “It’s that iconic image,” said Dr. Banner, the Monroe biographer. “People are still fascinated by the context in which it all happened. ” After screening the film with her husband, Ms. Siegler immediately told her grandfather that she had found the footage. “I was so excited about it  —   more for the reason that his story was true. ” She shrugged. “But he never had any doubts. ” Mr. Schulback moved in 2005 and died six months later. Ms. Siegler and Mr. Scher made a print and screened it for about 100 people in 2004 at the upstate home of their friends Kurt Andersen and his wife, Anne Kreamer. The two couples had started a small film festival for neighbors and friends, hanging a sheet on the side of a barn and serving popcorn, ice pops and beer. The people in the audience that summer night had no idea what they were in for. “That scene is one of the most iconic scenes in American cinema,” said Mr. Andersen, an author, radio host and a founder of Spy magazine. “So to have film of it actually being shot, it’s like watching the Zapruder film. It’s just extraordinary. ” The crowd that evening sat in silence as Marilyn Monroe’s dress blew up on the side of the barn. “People were ” Mr. Andersen said. “They were like, ‘What did I just see? ’” That was the only time anyone outside the family had seen the film. Until now.

0 - Death may be the great equalizer, but it isn’t necessarily evenhanded. Of all the fields of endeavor that suffered mortal losses in 2016  —   consider Muhammad Ali and Arnold Palmer in sports and the      Hollywood deaths of Carrie Fisher and Debbie Reynolds  —   the pop music world had, hands down, the bleakest year. Start with David Bowie, whose stage persona  —   androgynous glam rocker, dance pop star, electronic experimentalist  —   was as   as his music. The year was only days old when the news came that he had died of cancer at 69. He had hinted that his time was short in the lyrics of his final album, released just two days before his death, but he had otherwise gone to great lengths to hide his illness from the public, a wish for privacy that ensured that his death would appear to have come out of the blue. Then came another shock, about three months later, when Prince accidentally overdosed on a painkiller and collapsed in an elevator at his sprawling home studio near Minneapolis. Death came to him at 57, and by all indications no one, including Prince Rogers Nelson, had seen it coming. As energetic onstage as ever, holding to an otherwise healthy regimen, he had successfully defied age into his sixth decade, so why not death, too? Leonard Cohen, on the other hand, in his 83rd year, undoubtedly did see it coming, just over his shoulder, but he went on his  —   I hesitate to say merry  —   way, ever the wise,   troubadour playing to sellout crowds and shrugging at the inevitable, knowing that the dark would finally overtake him but saying essentially, “Until then, here’s another song. ” It was as if 2016 hadn’t delivered enough jolts to the system when it closed out the year with yet another   death. George Michael, the 1980s sensation whose aura had dimmed in later years, was 53 when he went to bed and never woke up on Christmas. Pop music figures fell all year, many of their voices still embedded in the nicked vinyl grooves of old records that a lot of people can’t bear to throw out. The roster included Paul Kantner of Jefferson Airplane Keith Emerson and Greg Lake of Emerson, Lake and Palmer Glenn Frey of the Eagles and Maurice White of Earth, Wind  Fire. Leon Russell, the piano pounder with a Delta blues wail and a mountain man’s mass of hair, died. So did Merle Haggard, rugged country poet of the common man and the   outlaw. He was joined by the bluegrass legend Ralph Stanley and the guitar virtuoso who was practically glued to Elvis’s swiveling hips in the early days: Scotty Moore. And then there was George Martin, whose   genius had such a creative influence on the sounds of John, Paul, George and Ringo (and, by extension, on the entire rock era) that he was hailed as the fifth Beatle. If the music stars could fill arenas, so could idols of another stripe: the mighty athletes who left the scene. No figure among them was as towering as Ali. Some called him the greatest sports figure of the 20th century, the boxer who combined power, grace and brains in a way the ring had never seen. But he was more than a great athlete. Matters of war, race and religion coursed through his life in a publicly turbulent way. Some people hated him when he refused to be drafted during the Vietnam War, a decision that cost him his heavyweight title. But more people admired him, even loved him, for his principled stands, his high spirits, his lightning mind, his winking   and, yes, his rhyming motormouth. Until illness closed in, little could contain him, certainly not mere ropes around a ring. Palmer, too, was transformational, golf’s first media star. The gentleman’s game was never quite the same after he began gathering an army on the rolling greenswards and leading a charge, his shirt coming untucked, a cigarette dangling from his lips, his club just that, a weapon, as he pressed the attack. An entire generation of   postwar guys took up the game because of Arnie, and not a few women did, too. He was athletically blessed, magnetically cool, telegenically handsome  —   but he was somehow one of them, too. The same was said of Gordie Howe, Mr. Hockey, a son of the Saskatchewan prairie who tore up the National Hockey League, hung up his skates at 52 and died at 88 and of Ralph Branca, a trolley car conductor’s son who was a living reminder that one crushing mistake  —   his, the fastball to Bobby Thomson that decided the 1951 National League pennant  —   can sometimes never be lived down. Pat Summitt, the coach who elevated women’s basketball, led her Tennessee teams to eight championships and won more games than any other college coach, could not defeat Alzheimer’s disease, dying at 64. And within months the National Basketball Association lost two giants from different eras. Clyde Lovelette, an Olympic, college and N. B. A. champion who transformed the game as one of its first truly big men, was 86 his hardwood heir Nate Thurmond, a defensive stalwart who battled Russell, Wilt and Kareem in the paint in a   Hall of Fame career, was 74. Even older, in the baseball ranks, was Monte Irvin. When he died at 96, there were few people still around who could remember watching him play, particularly in his prime, in the 1940s, when he was a star on the Negro circuit but barred from the   major leagues. He made the Hall of Fame anyway as a New York Giant and became Major League Baseball’s first black executive, but when he died, fans pondered again the question that has hung over many an athletic career shackled by discrimination: What if? A different question, in an entirely different sphere, arose after the stunning news that Justice Antonin Scalia had died on a hunting trip in Texas: What now? In the thick of one of the most consequential Supreme Court careers of modern times, he left a void in conservative jurisprudence and, more urgently, a vacancy on the bench that has yet to be filled, raising still more questions about what may await the country. Other exits from the public stage returned us to the past. Nancy Reagan’s death evoked the 1980s White House, where   glamour and   West Coast conservatism took up residence on the banks of the Potomac. John Glenn’s had us thinking again about a   burst of national pride soaring into outer space. The deaths of Tom Hayden and Daniel Berrigan, avatars of defiance, harked back to the student rebellions of the 1960s and the Vietnam War’s roiling home front. Phyllis Schlafly’s obituaries were windows on the roots of the right wing’s ascension in American politics. The death of Janet Reno, the first woman to serve as attorney general, recalled the Clinton years, all eight of them, from the firestorm at Waco, Tex. to the international tug of war over a Cuban boy named Elián González, to the bitter Senate battle over impeachment. On other shores, Fidel Castro’s death at 90 summoned memories of Cuban revolution, nuclear brinkmanship and enduring enmity between a   strongman and the superpower only 90 miles away. The name of Boutros   the Egyptian diplomat who led the United Nations, led to replayed nightmares of genocide in Rwanda and Bosnia. The death of Shimon Peres removed a last link to the very founding of Israel and conjured decades of growing military power and fitful strivings for peace. And that of Elie Wiesel, in New York, after his tireless struggle to compel the world never to forget, made us confront once again the gas chambers of Auschwitz. If writers, too, are   even in fiction, then the world is poorer without the literary voices of Harper Lee, Umberto Eco, Pat Conroy, Jim Harrison, Anita Brookner, Alvin Toffler, Gloria Naylor and William Trevor, not to mention the playwrights Peter Shaffer, Dario Fo and,   Edward Albee  —   all dead in 2016. But just as treasured were those who spun   for our viewing pleasure  —   none more lustily than Ms. Fisher, the     Princess Leia of the “Star Wars” tales. Just a day later, capping a year of startling deaths, Ms. Reynolds, a singing and acting leading lady of an earlier era, died at 84 in the throes of a mother’s grief. Devotees of the “Harry Potter” movies were saddened by the death of Alan Rickman, who played the deliciously dour professor Severus Snape in that blockbuster franchise but whose career, on both stage and screen, was far richer than many of Snape’s younger fans may have known. Zsa Zsa Gabor’s celebrity, by contrast, outshone a modest acting career. Gene Wilder and Garry Shandling died in the same year, both having perfected a brand of hilariously neurotic comedy fit for a   culture. And this time Abe Vigoda, of the “Godfather” movies and “Barney Miller,” actually did die, after having not actually done so years ago when wildly uninformed people spread the word that he had. On the other side of the camera were directors whose vision came to us from all parts: Jacques Rivette, the French New Wave auteur, with his   meditations on life and art Abbas Kiarostami, the Iranian master, with his searching examinations of ordinary lives Andrzej Wajda, a rival to Ingmar Bergman and Akira Kurosawa in some critics’ eyes, with his haunting tales of Poland under the boot first of Nazis and then of Communists. A long roster of television stars of a generation or two ago passed on, images of their younger selves frozen in time: Noel Neill (“Adventures of Superman”) Alan Young (“Mister Ed”) Robert Vaughn (“The Man From U. N. C. L. E. ”) William Schallert and Patty Duke (father and daughter on “The Patty Duke Show”) Dan Haggerty (“The Life and Times of Grizzly Adams”) Florence Henderson (“The Brady Bunch”) and Alan Thicke (“Growing Pains”). And Garry Marshall, the creative force who practically owned prime time with “Happy Days,” “Mork  Mindy,” “Laverne  Shirley” and more, died at 81. On Broadway, lights were dimmed in memory of Brian Bedford, Tammy Grimes and Anne Jackson, all brilliant in their day. The architect Zaha Hadid left behind monuments to her fertile imagination and shaken acolytes around the world. The street photographer Bill Cunningham, who found fashion statements on every corner, was suddenly missing, making Manhattan, overnight, a less idiosyncratic, less interesting place. That smiling skinny man pedaling his bicycle among the honking cabs in a blue French worker’s jacket with a camera slung around his neck  —   what a picture!  —   had split from the scene. So had seemingly a generation of fellow photographers who had made art in recording the last half of the 20th century: Ruth Gruber, Marc Riboud, Louis Stettner and more. And so had the TV journalists Morley Safer and Gwen Ifill and the TV commentator John McLaughlin, all of whom had tried to make sense of it. Music’s other precincts were emptier without the conductor and revolutionary composer Pierre Boulez and the new music soprano Phyllis Curtin the jazz artists Mose Allison, Bobby Hutcherson and Gato Barbieri the rapper Phife Dawg (Malik Taylor) and the Latin megastar Juan Gabriel. Silicon Valley saw a giant depart in Andrew S. Grove, who led the semiconductor revolution at Intel. The television industry lost a   executive, Grant Tinker, who in the ’80s made NBC the network to watch in prime time. Astrophysics, and the smaller world of women in science, said farewell to a pioneer and a champion in Vera Rubin. And for tens of thousands of people who might have choked to death had they not been saved by his simple but ingenious maneuver, the passing of Henry J. Heimlich prompted not just sympathy but, even more, gratitude. Come to think of it, eliciting a large, if silent, thank you from those who live on is not a bad way for anyone to go. Which brings us to Marion Pritchard. Few who died in 2016 could have inspired measures of gratitude more profound. She was a brave young Dutch student and a   gentile who risked her life to save Jews from death camps in the early 1940s, in one instance shooting a Nazi stooge before he could seize three little children she had been hiding. By her estimate she saved 150 people. How many were still alive when she died a few weeks ago at 96 is anyone’s guess. But we know for certain that some were, and we can reasonably surmise that a good many more were, too, all of them still in possession of her selfless gift and her matchless legacy, their very lives.

0 - President Obama delivered his farewell address in Chicago on Tuesday. The following is the complete transcript, as provided by the Federal News Service. OBAMA: Hello Chicago! (APPLAUSE) It’s good to be home! (APPLAUSE) Thank you, everybody! (APPLAUSE) Thank you. (APPLAUSE) Thank you. (APPLAUSE) Thank you so much, thank you. Thank you. Thank you. (APPLAUSE) It’s good to be home. Thank you. (APPLAUSE) We’re on live TV here, I’ve got to move. (APPLAUSE) You can tell that I’m a lame duck, because nobody is following instructions. (LAUGHTER) Everybody have a seat. My fellow Americans, Michelle and I have been so touched by all the   that we’ve received over the past few weeks. But tonight it’s my turn to say thanks. Whether we have seen    or rarely agreed at all, my conversations with you, the American people  —   in living rooms and in schools at farms and on factory floors at diners and on distant military outposts  —   those conversations are what have kept me honest, and kept me inspired, and kept me going. And every day, I have learned from you. You made me a better president, and you made me a better man. So I first came to Chicago when I was in my early twenties, and I was still trying to figure out who I was still searching for a purpose to my life. And it was a neighborhood not far from here where I began working with church groups in the shadows of closed steel mills. It was on these streets where I witnessed the power of faith, and the quiet dignity of working people in the face of struggle and loss. (CROWD CHANTING “FOUR MORE YEARS”) I can’t do that. Now this is where I learned that change only happens when ordinary people get involved, and they get engaged, and they come together to demand it. After eight years as your president, I still believe that. And it’s not just my belief. It’s the beating heart of our American idea  —   our bold experiment in  . It’s the conviction that we are all created equal, endowed by our creator with certain unalienable rights, among them life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. It’s the insistence that these rights, while   have never been   that We, the People, through the instrument of our democracy, can form a more perfect union. What a radical idea, the great gift that our Founders gave to us. The freedom to chase our individual dreams through our sweat, and toil, and imagination  —   and the imperative to strive together as well, to achieve a common good, a greater good. For 240 years, our nation’s call to citizenship has given work and purpose to each new generation. It’s what led patriots to choose republic over tyranny, pioneers to trek west, slaves to brave that makeshift railroad to freedom. It’s what pulled immigrants and refugees across oceans and the Rio Grande. It’s what pushed women to reach for the ballot. It’s what powered workers to organize. It’s why GIs gave their lives at Omaha Beach and Iwo Jima Iraq and Afghanistan  —   and why men and women from Selma to Stonewall were prepared to give theirs as well. (APPLAUSE) So that’s what we mean when we say America is exceptional. Not that our nation has been flawless from the start, but that we have shown the capacity to change, and make life better for those who follow. Yes, our progress has been uneven. The work of democracy has always been hard. It has been contentious. Sometimes it has been bloody. For every two steps forward, it often feels we take one step back. But the long sweep of America has been defined by forward motion, a constant widening of our founding creed to embrace all, and not just some. (APPLAUSE) If I had told you eight years ago that America would reverse a great recession, reboot our auto industry, and unleash the longest stretch of job creation in our history  —   if I had told you that we would open up a new chapter with the Cuban people, shut down Iran’s nuclear weapons program without firing a shot, take out the mastermind of    —   if I had told you that we would win marriage equality and secure the right to health insurance for another 20 million of our fellow citizens  —   if I had told you all that, you might have said our sights were set a little too high. But that’s what we did. That’s what you did. You were the change. The answer to people’s hopes and, because of you, by almost every measure, America is a better, stronger place than it was when we started. In 10 days the world will witness a hallmark of our democracy. No, no, no, no, no. The peaceful transfer of power from one   President to the next. I committed to   Trump that my administration would ensure the smoothest possible transition, just as President Bush did for me. Because it’s up to all of us to make sure our government can help us meet the many challenges we still face. We have what we need to do so. We have everything we need to meet those challenges. After all, we remain the wealthiest, most powerful, and most respected nation on earth. Our youth, our drive, our diversity and openness, our boundless capacity for risk and reinvention means that the future should be ours. But that potential will only be realized if our democracy works. Only if our politics better reflects the decency of our people. Only if all of us, regardless of party affiliation or particular interests help restore the sense of common purpose that we so badly need right now. And that’s what I want to focus on tonight, the state of our democracy. Understand democracy does not require uniformity. Our founders argued, they quarreled, and eventually they compromised. They expected us to do the same. But they knew that democracy does require a basic sense of solidarity. The idea that, for all our outward differences, we’re all in this together, that we rise or fall as one. There have been moments throughout our history that threatened that solidarity. And the beginning of this century has been one of those times. A shrinking world, growing inequality, demographic change, and the specter of terrorism. These forces haven’t just tested our security and our prosperity, but are testing our democracy as well. And how we meet these challenges to our democracy will determine our ability to educate our kids and create good jobs and protect our homeland. In other words, it will determine our future. To begin with, our democracy won’t work without a sense that everyone has economic opportunity. (APPLAUSE) And the good news is that today the economy is growing again. Wages, incomes, home values and retirement accounts are all rising again. Poverty is falling again. (APPLAUSE) The wealthy are paying a fair share of taxes. Even as the stock market shatters records, the unemployment rate is near a   low. The uninsured rate has never, ever been lower. (APPLAUSE) Health care costs are rising at the slowest rate in 50 years. And I’ve said, and I mean it, anyone can put together a plan that is demonstrably better than the improvements we’ve made to our health care system, that covers as many people at less cost, I will publicly support it. (APPLAUSE) Because that, after all, is why we serve. Not to score points or take credit. But to make people’s lives better. (APPLAUSE) But, for all the real progress that we’ve made, we know it’s not enough. Our economy doesn’t work as well or grow as fast when a few prosper at the expense of a growing middle class, and ladders for folks who want to get into the middle class. (APPLAUSE) That’s the economic argument. But stark inequality is also corrosive to our democratic idea. While the top 1 percent has amassed a bigger share of wealth and income, too many of our families in inner cities and in rural counties have been left behind. The laid off factory worker, the waitress or health care worker who’s just barely getting by and struggling to pay the bills. Convinced that the game is fixed against them. That their government only serves the interest of the powerful. That’s a recipe for more cynicism and polarization in our politics. Now there’re no quick fixes to this   trend. I agree, our trade should be fair and not just free. But the next wave of economic dislocations won’t come from overseas. It will come from the relentless pace of automation that makes a lot of good middle class jobs obsolete. And so we’re going to have to forge a new social compact to guarantee all our kids the education they need. (APPLAUSE) To give workers the power. .. (APPLAUSE) . .. to unionize for better wages. (CHEERS) To update the social safety net to reflect the way we live now. (APPLAUSE) And make more reforms to the tax code so corporations and the individuals who reap the most from this new economy don’t avoid their obligations to the country that’s made their very success possible. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) We can argue about how to best achieve these goals. But we can’t be complacent about the goals themselves. For if we don’t create opportunity for all people, the disaffection and division that has stalled our progress will only sharpen in years to come. There’s a second threat to our democracy. And this one is as old as our nation itself. After my election there was talk of a   America. And such a vision, however well intended, was never realistic. Race remains a potent. .. (APPLAUSE) . .. and often divisive force in our society. Now I’ve lived long enough to know that race relations are better than they were 10 or 20 or 30 years ago, no matter what some folks say. (APPLAUSE) You can see it not just in statistics. You see it in the attitudes of young Americans across the political spectrum. But we’re not where we need to be. And all of us have more work to do. (APPLAUSE) If every economic issue is framed as a struggle between a hardworking white middle class and an undeserving minority, then workers of all shades are going to be left fighting for scraps while the wealthy withdraw further into their private enclaves. (APPLAUSE) If we’re unwilling to invest in the children of immigrants, just because they don’t look like us, we will diminish the prospects of our own children  —   because those brown kids will represent a larger and larger share of America’s workforce. (APPLAUSE) And we have shown that our economy doesn’t have to be a   game. Last year, incomes rose for all races, all age groups, for men and for women. So if we’re going to be serious about race going forward, we need to uphold laws against discrimination  —   in hiring, and in housing, and in education, and in the criminal justice system. (APPLAUSE) That is what our Constitution and highest ideals require. But laws alone won’t be enough. Hearts must change. It won’t change overnight. Social attitudes oftentimes take generations to change. But if our democracy is to work the way it should in this increasingly diverse nation, then each one of us need to try to heed the advice of a great character in American fiction, Atticus Finch, who said “You never really understand a person until you consider things from his point of view, until you climb into his skin and walk around in it. ” For blacks and other minority groups, that means tying our own very real struggles for justice to the challenges that a lot of people in this country face. Not only the refugee or the immigrant or the rural poor or the transgender American, but also the   white guy who from the outside may seem like he’s got all the advantages, but has seen his world upended by economic, and cultural, and technological change. We have to pay attention and listen. (APPLAUSE) For white Americans, it means acknowledging that the effects of slavery and Jim Crow didn’t suddenly vanish in the ’60s that when minority groups voice discontent, they’re not just engaging in reverse racism or practicing political correctness when they wage peaceful protest, they’re not demanding special treatment, but the equal treatment that our founders promised. (APPLAUSE) For   Americans, it means reminding ourselves that the stereotypes about immigrants today were said, almost word for word, about the Irish, and Italians, and Poles, who it was said were going to destroy the fundamental character of America. And as it turned out, America wasn’t weakened by the presence of these newcomers these newcomers embraced this nation’s creed, and this nation was strengthened. (APPLAUSE) So regardless of the station we occupy we all have to try harder we all have to start with the premise that each of our fellow citizens loves this country just as much as we do that they value hard work and family just like we do that their children are just as curious and hopeful and worthy of love as our own. (APPLAUSE) (CHEERING) And that’s not easy to do. For too many of us it’s become safer to retreat into our own bubbles, whether in our neighborhoods, or on college campuses, or places of worship, or especially our social media feeds, surrounded by people who look like us and share the same political outlook and never challenge our assumptions. In the rise of naked partisanship and increasing economic and regional stratification, the splintering of our media into a channel for every taste, all this makes this great sorting seem natural, even inevitable. And increasingly we become so secure in our bubbles that we start accepting only information, whether it’s true or not, that fits our opinions, instead of basing our opinions on the evidence that is out there. (APPLAUSE) And this trend represents a third threat to our democracy. Look, politics is a battle of ideas. That’s how our democracy was designed. In the course of a healthy debate, we prioritize different goals, and the different means of reaching them. But without some common baseline of facts, without a willingness to admit new information and concede that your opponent might be making a fair point, and that science and reason matter, then we’re going to keep talking past each other. (CROWD CHEERS) And we’ll make common ground and compromise impossible. And isn’t that part of what so often makes politics dispiriting? How can elected officials rage about deficits when we propose to spend money on   for kids, but not when we’re cutting taxes for corporations? How do we excuse ethical lapses in our own party, but pounce when the other party does the same thing? It’s not just dishonest, it’s selective sorting of the facts. It’s   because, as my mom used to tell me, reality has a way of catching up with you. Take the challenge of climate change. In just eight years we’ve halved our dependence on foreign oil, we’ve doubled our renewable energy, we’ve led the world to an agreement that (at) the promise to save this planet. (APPLAUSE) But without bolder action, our children won’t have time to debate the existence of climate change. They’ll be busy dealing with its effects. More environmental disasters, more economic disruptions, waves of climate refugees seeking sanctuary. Now we can and should argue about the best approach to solve the problem. But to simply deny the problem not only betrays future generations, it betrays the essential spirit of this country, the essential spirit of innovation and practical   that guided our founders. (CROWD CHEERS) It is that spirit  —   it is that spirit born of the enlightenment that made us an economic powerhouse. The spirit that took flight at Kitty Hawk and Cape Canaveral, the spirit that cures disease and put a computer in every pocket, it’s that spirit. A faith in reason and enterprise, and the primacy of right over might, that allowed us to resist the lure of fascism and tyranny during the Great Depression, that allowed us to build a   War II order with other democracies. An order based not just on military power or national affiliations, but built on principles, the rule of law, human rights, freedom of religion and speech and assembly and an independent press. (APPLAUSE) That order is now being challenged. First by violent fanatics who claim to speak for Islam. More recently by autocrats in foreign capitals who seek free markets in open democracies and civil society itself as a threat to their power. The peril each poses to our democracy is more far reaching than a car bomb or a missile. They represent the fear of change. The fear of people who look or speak or pray differently. A contempt for the rule of law that holds leaders accountable. An intolerance of dissent and free thought. A belief that the sword or the gun or the bomb or the propaganda machine is the ultimate arbiter of what’s true and what’s right. Because of the extraordinary courage of our men and women in uniform. Because of our intelligence officers and law enforcement and diplomats who support our troops. .. (APPLAUSE) . .. no foreign terrorist organization has successfully planned and executed an attack on our homeland these past eight years. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) And although. .. (APPLAUSE) . .. Boston and Orlando and San Bernardino and Fort Hood remind us of how dangerous radicalization can be, our law enforcement agencies are more effective and vigilant than ever. We have taken out tens of thousands of terrorists, including Bin Laden. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) The global coalition we’re leading against ISIL has taken out their leaders and taken away about half their territory. ISIL will be destroyed. And no one who threatens America will ever be safe. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) And all who serve or have served  —   it has been the honor of my lifetime to be your   . (CHEERS) And we all owe you a deep debt of gratitude. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) But, protecting our way of life, that’s not just the job of our military. Democracy can buckle when it gives into fear. So just as we as citizens must remain vigilant against external aggression, we must guard against a weakening of the values that make us who we are. (APPLAUSE) And that’s why for the past eight years I’ve worked to put the fight against terrorism on a firmer legal footing. That’s why we’ve ended torture, worked to close Gitmo, reformed our laws governing surveillance to protect privacy and civil liberties. (APPLAUSE) That’s why I reject discrimination against Muslim Americans. .. (CHEERS) . .. who are just as patriotic as we are. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) That’s why. .. (APPLAUSE) That’s why we cannot withdraw. .. (APPLAUSE) That’s why we cannot withdraw from big global fights to expand democracy and human rights and women’s rights and LGBT rights. (APPLAUSE) No matter how imperfect our efforts, no matter how expedient ignoring such values may seem, that’s part of defending America. For the fight against extremism and intolerance and sectarianism and chauvinism are of a piece with the fight against authoritarianism and nationalist aggression. If the scope of freedom and respect for the rule of law shrinks around the world, the likelihood of war within and between nations increases, and our own freedoms will eventually be threatened. So let’s be vigilant, but not afraid. ISIL will try to kill innocent people. But they cannot defeat America unless we betray our Constitution and our principles in the fight. (APPLAUSE) Rivals like Russia or China cannot match our influence around the world  —   unless we give up what we stand for, and turn ourselves into just another big country that bullies smaller neighbors. Which brings me to my final point  —   our democracy is threatened whenever we take it for granted. (APPLAUSE) All of us, regardless of party, should be throwing ourselves into the task of rebuilding our democratic institutions. (APPLAUSE) When voting rates in America are some of the lowest among advanced democracies, we should be making it easier, not harder, to vote. (APPLAUSE) When trust in our institutions is low, we should reduce the corrosive influence of money in our politics, and insist on the principles of transparency and ethics in public service. When Congress is dysfunctional, we should draw our districts to encourage politicians to cater to common sense and not rigid extremes. (APPLAUSE) But remember, none of this happens on its own. All of this depends on our participation on each of us accepting the responsibility of citizenship, regardless of which way the pendulum of power happens to be swinging. Our Constitution is a remarkable, beautiful gift. But it’s really just a piece of parchment. It has no power on its own. We, the people, give it power. We, the people, give it meaning  —   with our participation, and with the choices that we make and the alliances that we forge. Whether or not we stand up for our freedoms. Whether or not we respect and enforce the rule of law, that’s up to us. America is no fragile thing. But the gains of our long journey to freedom are not assured. In his own farewell address, George Washington wrote that   is the underpinning of our safety, prosperity, and liberty, but “from different causes and from different quarters much pains will be taken. .. to weaken in your minds the conviction of this truth. ” And so we have to preserve this truth with “jealous anxiety” that we should reject “the first dawning of every attempt to alienate any portion of our country from the rest or to enfeeble the sacred ties” that make us one. (APPLAUSE) America, we weaken those ties when we allow our political dialogue to become so corrosive that people of good character aren’t even willing to enter into public service. So coarse with rancor that Americans with whom we disagree are seen, not just as misguided, but as malevolent. We weaken those ties when we define some of us as more American than others. (APPLAUSE) When we write off the whole system as inevitably corrupt. And when we sit back and blame the leaders we elect without examining our own role in electing them. (CROWD CHEERS) It falls to each of us to be those anxious, jealous guardians of our democracy. Embrace the joyous task we have been given to continually try to improve this great nation of ours because, for all our outward differences, we in fact all share the same proud type, the most important office in a democracy, citizen. (APPLAUSE) Citizen. So, you see, that’s what our democracy demands. It needs you. Not just when there’s an election, not just when you own narrow interest is at stake, but over the full span of a lifetime. If you’re tired of arguing with strangers on the Internet, try talking with one of them in real life. (APPLAUSE) If something needs fixing, then lace up your shoes and do some organizing. (CROWD CHEERS) If you’re disappointed by your elected officials, grab a clip board, get some signatures, and run for office yourself. (CROWD CHEERS) Show up, dive in, stay at it. Sometimes you’ll win, sometimes you’ll lose. Presuming a reservoir in goodness, that can be a risk. And there will be times when the process will disappoint you. But for those of us fortunate enough to have been part of this one and to see it up close, let me tell you, it can energize and inspire. And more often than not, your faith in America and in Americans will be confirmed. Mine sure has been. (APPLAUSE) Over the course of these eight years, I’ve seen the hopeful faces of young graduates and our newest military officers. I have mourned with grieving families searching for answers, and found grace in a Charleston church. I’ve seen our scientists help a paralyzed man regain his sense of touch. I’ve seen Wounded Warriors who at points were given up for dead walk again. I’ve seen our doctors and volunteers rebuild after earthquakes and stop pandemics in their tracks. I’ve seen the youngest of children remind us through their actions and through their generosity of our obligations to care for refugees or work for peace and, above all, to look out for each other. So that faith that I placed all those years ago, not far from here, in the power of ordinary Americans to bring about change, that faith has been rewarded in ways I could not have possibly imagined. And I hope your faith has too. Some of you here tonight or watching at home, you were there with us in 2004 and 2008, 2012. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) Maybe you still can’t believe we pulled this whole thing off. (CHEERS) Let me tell you, you’re not the only ones. (LAUGHTER) Michelle. .. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) Michelle LaVaughn Robinson of the South Side. .. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) . .. for the past 25 years you have not only been my wife and mother of my children, you have been my best friend. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) You took on a role you didn’t ask for. And you made it your own with grace and with grit and with style, and good humor. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) You made the White House a place that belongs to everybody. (CHEERS) And a new generation sets its sights higher because it has you as a role model. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) You have made me proud, and you have made the country proud. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) Malia and Sasha. .. (CHEERS) . .. under the strangest of circumstances you have become two amazing young women. (CHEERS) You are smart and you are beautiful. But more importantly, you are kind and you are thoughtful and you are full of passion. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) And. .. (APPLAUSE) . .. you wore the burden of years in the spotlight so easily. Of all that I have done in my life, I am most proud to be your dad. (APPLAUSE) To Joe Biden. .. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) . .. the scrappy kid from Scranton. .. (CHEERS) . .. who became Delaware’s favorite son. You were the first decision I made as a nominee, and it was the best. (CHEERS) (APPLAUSE) Not just because you have been a great vice president, but because in the bargain I gained a brother. And we love you and Jill like family. And your friendship has been one of the great joys of our lives. (APPLAUSE) To my remarkable staff, for eight years, and for some of you a whole lot more, I have drawn from your energy. And every day I try to reflect back what you displayed. Heart and character. And idealism. I’ve watched you grow up, get married, have kids, start incredible new journeys of your own. Even when times got tough and frustrating, you never let Washington get the better of you. You guarded against cynicism. And the only thing that makes me prouder than all the good that we’ve done is the thought of all the amazing things that you are going to achieve from here. (APPLAUSE) And to all of you out there  —   every organizer who moved to an unfamiliar town, every kind family who welcomed them in, every volunteer who knocked on doors, every young person who cast a ballot for the first time, every American who lived and breathed the hard work of change  —   you are the best supporters and organizers anybody could ever hope for, and I will forever be grateful. Because you did change the world. (APPLAUSE) You did. And that’s why I leave this stage tonight even more optimistic about this country than when we started. Because I know our work has not only helped so many Americans it has inspired so many Americans  —   especially so many young people out there  —   to believe that you can make a difference to hitch your wagon to something bigger than yourselves. Let me tell you, this generation coming up  —   unselfish, altruistic, creative, patriotic  —   I’ve seen you in every corner of the country. You believe in a fair, and just, and inclusive America you know that constant change has been America’s hallmark, that it’s not something to fear but something to embrace, you are willing to carry this hard work of democracy forward. You’ll soon outnumber any of us, and I believe as a result the future is in good hands. (APPLAUSE) My fellow Americans, it has been the honor of my life to serve you. I won’t stop in fact, I will be right there with you, as a citizen, for all my remaining days. But for now, whether you are young or whether you’re young at heart, I do have one final ask of you as your president  —   the same thing I asked when you took a chance on me eight years ago. I am asking you to believe. Not in my ability to bring about change  —   but in yours. I am asking you to hold fast to that faith written into our founding documents that idea whispered by slaves and abolitionists that spirit sung by immigrants and homesteaders and those who marched for justice that creed reaffirmed by those who planted flags from foreign battlefields to the surface of the moon a creed at the core of every American whose story is not yet written: Yes, we can. (APPLAUSE) Yes, we did. (APPLAUSE) Yes, we can. (APPLAUSE) Thank you. God bless you. And may God continue to bless the United States of America. Thank you. (APPLAUSE) END

0 - The Season 7 “Real Housewives of New Jersey” reunion show took place in October in a theater in Westbury, N. Y. An elaborate    thing had been constructed on a stage that would soon seat the five Housewives, complete with a   rug and zebra chairs, everything sparkling, everything  . The set was erected so specifically and thoroughly that it included a kitchen in the back, unusable but complete, that you could see only a fraction of, and a fireplace that the cameras would never pick up. “That’s not a real fireplace?” I asked a production assistant, who answered, “It’s not not real. ” The five contracted Housewives arrived on Long Island the night before for this   reckoning of the season’s tensions, equal parts State of the State panel discussion and   of every lunchtime confrontation that occurred at my   high school. The Housewives were shuttled in black S. U. V.s under the cover of darkness to a hotel more than two hours from where they live, in order to “throw off the scent to the press,” a publicist told me, though “scent” is a strange word choice here because anyone with a nose could have    the place from the sheer concentration of applied Shalimar. But there was good reason for the secrecy. Leaks from these reunion shows have been rampant, and after a previous one, Andy Cohen, the   mediator and the franchise creator (or as he says, “the person who gets credit for creating the franchise” when, really, a lot of other people were involved) realized that the leaks might be coming from the hair and makeup teams, who watch the live feed from a holding room. He told the producers to cut the audio to those dressing rooms. Since then, the integrity of his reunion show  —   if, again, “integrity” is the right word to describe the absolute ravaging of women by their former, current and future friends, accusing one another of everything from having had more than their admitted amount of plastic surgery to being an actual F. B. I. snitch  —   has been intact. The only leaks would be coming from Cohen, and they’d come when he decided they would come. Cohen prepared himself in a sunny, makeshift dressing room on the first floor, standing shirtless as he tried to choose a tie for the    —   yes, that’s    —   taping. His voice was a hoarse whisper, stubbornly projected through sheer will from deep behind his sternum. He had just come from disseminating his Andyness throughout the country on a speaking tour with his friend Anderson Cooper, in which both men told stories from their personal lives and drank Fresquilas on stage. There were a few    appearances for his coming book tour for “Superficial: More Adventures From the Andy Cohen Diaries. ” He had been talking for hours on his weekly radio shows (plural) as well as negotiating and announcing his new book imprint, Andy Cohen Books. He had been hosting his nightly live talk show on Bravo, “Watch What Happens Live With Andy Cohen. ” And of course, he continued to   the “Real Housewives” franchise, watching cuts of each episode for all seven cities, giving notes, hiring, firing, reconsidering and fielding    text messages from the stars of those shows, sometimes replying purely with emoji. I told him that the Housewives, who were waiting for the taping to begin, seemed nervous. “A lot of them view me as kind of their daddy in some weird, sick way, and their boss, and their friend, and their boyfriend, and their enemy  —   and so there’s a lot of different psychological layers happening in a situation like this,” he replied. “Some of them are volatile women. So it’s all real. It’s all real. ” Below the street, in their dressing rooms, the Housewives breathed through the tension. They had lived their reality on camera and watched the results. They had heard their Housewife colleagues talk about their behavior in   interviews. And they had built within themselves a caldron of anger, resentment and oh, yeah? s to what they had seen. So as not to dilute their fury, so as not to lose one moment of heat for the cameras, the publicists brought them to me separately through secured hallways, like Hannibal Lecter on his gurney. Teresa Giudice, who wore a satin evening gown and body shimmer (it was 8 a. m.) told me she used to be nervous about confronting certain cast members at these reunions, but now, since serving a prison term for fraud in 2015, which she continually refers to as “the time I went away,” she’s fine she’s ready for her day in court or whatever this is for her. She used to resent Cohen, because she thought he was hardest on her, but now she takes a more nuanced view. “I think he’s an amazing guy,” she said. “If he was straight, I definitely would date him. ” Jacqueline Laurita, who was Teresa’s best friend but has now replaced Melissa Gorga as Teresa’s sworn enemy for life, admitted that she was expecting a blood bath. “Yeah, it feels like you’re walking to the electric chair” is how she put it. She knew she would be held accountable for crimes that included calling Teresa a “criminal” and accusing Teresa’s allies of being her “soldiers. ” Jacqueline knew she just had to endure it. She has stopped trying to game Cohen at these things. “He greets you with a smile, and he has a way about him, and he makes you feel comfortable talking about things, and he can pull the best and the worst out of you with a smile on his face. ” She agreed that the best way to think of Cohen is the way you think of Jesus. You pray to him for blessings  —   to get more airtime, to get a rival off the show  —   but like Jesus himself, he answers prayers only sometimes. In his sunny dressing room up above, I asked Cohen how he’d feel if, like the Housewives, he were about to be confronted by everyone he’d interacted with this year. “I’m not on a reality show about my life” was his answer. It annoys him, this implication that what he’s doing is somehow cruel to the women who have signed up for it. But don’t you feel bad for them? I wanted to know. He shook his head, the way he would every time I didn’t get it. These women, who were once housewives, real housewives, are now businesswomen. Teresa Giudice is a   New York Times   author. Melissa Gorga has a successful clothing store. Jacqueline Laurita now has a platform to talk about her son’s autism and for her husband to sell a   brand called the Little Kernel. “I’m in a business relationship with these women,” he said. “They know what they’re doing. ” He put on his shirt and picked the striped tie. Walking out, he was intercepted by Kathleen French, a senior vice president at Bravo, who said that things had become a little too crazy the night before at the end of the “Real Housewives of Orange County” trip to Ireland. “Don’t tell me any more,” he said. “Let me just see it. ” He took his place in the fake living room and sat down. “Very casual,” he said as the women   out in their restrictive formal wear,   a deep mustard and hair spritzed to within an inch of   laws. “This is their Super Bowl,” he told me when I asked why they were in   tie before 8 a. m. Over the next few hours, as they said things like “Oh, really, bitch?” and “I was friends with Teresa when she was chasing a prostitution whore out of a country club” and “Do I look like an ape?” and “I’m turning you off” and “You’re a dumb bitch,” Cohen’s placid cool sometimes gave way to frustration. “Stay on your couches!” he beseeched them. “Don’t push Daddy!” He put a finger gun to his head as Teresa accused Jacqueline of selling a story to a tabloid. He won’t like that I began this article with the “Housewives. ” Cohen has hosted a nightly talk show now for more than seven years that features scintillating conversation with celebrities and (O. K. yes) clips of Bravo shows, but his guests are legitimate stars, like Meryl Streep and Oprah Winfrey and (O. K. yes) Real Housewives. “Watch What Happens Live” is doing well, with nearly 800, 000 viewers a night. The set just expanded to accommodate twice its   audience. But you can’t talk about Cohen without talking about the     empire that he helped create in 2006  —   a juggernaut of unscripted television, with all but one of the locales (it’s Dallas) averaging two or three million viewers per   episode. “Real Housewives” is watched sincerely, it is watched as camp. It is   it is   it is   it is pored over by at least one very funny podcast (“Bitch Sesh”) it is debated by feminists, it is singled out for a particular kind of cultural degradation that has seeped into our national conversation and it is fairly said to have been a factor in our recent elevation of a   host to the highest office of this country, a man who apparently spent Thanksgiving asking his guests,   style, whom he should pick for secretary of state. Cohen was at a Jewish Federation speaking gig in Washington recently when a man raised his hand and asked if he felt responsible for the level of discourse that the American republic had descended to in the last few months. It was two weeks before the election, and the question was fair. Over the 10 million episodes of “Real Housewives” I watched this fall, I heard people say to one another, “I just wanna friggin rip his balls off” and “Put away your penis . .. and maybe someone would treat you like a woman. ” I saw a woman flip a table when she was angry, a woman who threw her fake leg when she was angry (more on this later). I saw women demand respect, respect, respect, saying, “You don’t respect me” and “That is not respect” and “That’s disrespectful,” respect in the way that people who conduct themselves respectfully and respectably seldom feel the need to demand out loud. Over in the presidential debates, meanwhile, Hillary Clinton was called a “nasty woman,” and Donald Trump’s Twitter feed seemed as if it had been ghostwritten by Kelly Dodd, the Real Housewife of Orange County responsible for such Twitter pronouncements as: “Got my phone hacked with the fraud Dept. Going to get a private investigator and I’m going to sue  press charges!! Good luck Thunderdome. ” But Cohen told that man in Washington this: “First of all, the ‘Housewives’ are entertainment. Second of all, in the ‘Housewives universe,’ you get punished for behaving badly. There are consequences to it. ” The consequences to Donald Trump’s behavior, by contrast, seemed to be more people loving him. Had he seen the polls? I asked. He had made a similar speech to me, and I was skeptical. Trump’s not going to win, I told him. Cohen pursed his lips and raised his eyebrows and tilted his head back and forth in consideration. “You never know. ” I didn’t listen to him. No one did, not even when he conducted two televised and dubiously scientific polls of the people who tuned into “Watch What Happens Live” and turned up numbers based on about 60, 000 votes that said, actually, yes, Trump was going to win. He’s used to that. “There’s a lot of times when I will say something about politics, and people will immediately discount me, and I think it’s the easiest way to discount my show too. It’s just like, Oh, that’s the ‘Housewives’ guy, who cares?” Cohen explained a few weeks after the reunion. We were at Cafe Cluny in the West Village for lunch in the 3 p. m. hour, which is the approximate time lunch happens for someone who goes to bed at about 2 a. m. each night, often following a   massage. He ordered a salad and then stared down the three pieces of dark chocolate that came with the check. “I think I’m   about it, but on the other hand, if that’s what I am, I’m also good with it because it’s a wonderful thing to be. ” His voice didn’t get less hoarse over the months I spent with him. “You know what I mean?” He opened his mouth to say something else, only to remember that control in an interview resides with the person who can stop talking. “Look, I was a thinking person before the Housewives ever came. ” He took a piece of the chocolate. “I’ve been a TV producer for a long time  —   not that that’s Mensa, but I’ve had a career, and I made my own way. So I just think, If I ever say something that someone doesn’t want to hear, it’s a very easy thing to then say, Oh, well, coming from the ‘Housewives’ guy, oh, really, Mr. ‘Real Housewives’?” He is lately, at 48, consumed with trying to gauge exactly where he stands in the national esteem. When I first met him, in his downtown office, a few minutes before he went on the air, he asked me why I wanted to do an article on him. “I’m just not that introspective,” he said. I took this to mean he possessed the natural discomfort that a producer might have with someone else telling his story. But soon I realized it was more about positioning: Do we think of him as the “Housewives” guy  —   or as a former Bravo head of development who has a thriving production company? Or a guy with his own channel on Sirius XM Radio that features shows with Sandra Bernhard and Dan Rather? Or the author of three   books, or the host of a nightly talk show, the first one in late night with a working bar, no matter what James Corden says? He is no longer what he started out as on the talk show, the kind of person who could ask the question we wanted answered (like: Jacqueline, why would you sit on that woman’s lap after she threatened to “rage on your ass”? ). Now he’s one of the famous people. And so he is these days often trying to figure out a metric by which he can ascertain where he falls in the fame food chain. In “Superficial,” there’s a diary entry in which he talks about getting a   invitation from his good friend Sarah Jessica Parker to be her date for the Met Gala  —   so that’s data. But he goes to Ralph Lauren to get a tux for the event and the one he likes is being held for Bobby Cannavale, and he spends a little time trying to process that he doesn’t have more pull than Bobby Cannavale. Another tux he likes is being held for Johnny Depp, which is O. K. with him, because of course Johnny Depp. “It didn’t piss me off,” he insisted when I asked about the incident and his calculations surrounding it. “No. I was like, oh, O. K. oh, good, here’s a ranking, and now I know where I stand. They’re telling me where I stand. I’m finding out how this works. ” He paused for a second. “I’m just psyched that I’m getting a tux. ” O. K. maybe it did sting a little when Vanity Fair had an article devoted to the hosts of late night, and Cohen seemed to be the only one excluded from it. Trevor Noah hadn’t even made his debut yet! But again, this is just data. “Everything’s good,” he insisted. “I have my health. I have my show. I have my life. You know what I mean?” But also, “I think my show is a late show, you know?” Don’t read any of this as defeated or bitter. If there’s one thing about Cohen, it’s that his respect for the democratic rhythms of popular culture and popularity in general is total. He wants to watch the rise and fall of things, even himself, without trying to manipulate the process. He wants it all to play out. The people will decide, and watching what the people decide and how they decide is far more important than the decision itself. From a young age, there was something about Andy Cohen that his mother couldn’t quite put her finger on. They would watch “All My Children” together during the    era ( ) which she wondered if maybe other sons weren’t doing with their mothers. He had a Diana Ross poster on his wall. What was it, though? What was it? Then one day, she was watching him “prance” (her word) across the stage in his high school’s performance of “Carousel,” and a notion crept in and took hold. She got home that night and looked under his bed, where she found a healthy stash of gay porn. Now she was sure something was going on, but what? She spoke with a psychologist she knew who understood gay issues because he had a gay relative, and that psychologist told her that maybe she should stop looking under his bed. Andy was about to leave for college, for Boston University, and the psychologist said, “B. U. is a good place for him to go for that, he’ll meet a lot of other gay people,” and now his mother really began to suspect something was up. A few years later, Cohen wrote a   letter to a friend that he left on his parents’ kitchen table, and his mother read it and sat him down and asked him if he was sure. And he told her he was. A mother always knows. He knew he wanted to be onscreen even in high school, but he didn’t want to play characters. He wanted to be famous for being himself, but at the time, that idea didn’t truly exist yet outside the news and shows like Oprah and “Donahue. ” “I liked the idea of being myself in front of the camera. So, just me being me. I used to think if I could work on a morning show then I could be me. ” He got a job as an intern at CBS News, then as a producer there, but he started to burn out after 10 years. After a   run at the   Barry Diller cable network Trio, he landed at Bravo, where he helped develop breakout successes like “Top Chef” and “The Millionaire Matchmaker. ” Lauren Zalaznick, at the time president of Bravo, recalls someone coming in with hundreds of hours of documentary tape from a gated community in Orange County, Calif. which the producers needed to work. In that footage, Cohen saw something. “I don’t want to pretend like it was like lightning in a bottle at the beginning,” he said. “I was like: ‘This is a soap opera. This is a soap opera. ’’u2009” It was also something else. “This is real life. ”’ Right before the first season aired in 2006, he had a minor crisis over the opening credits. The “Housewives” shows usually begin with an introduction of each Housewife, posing in Grade A evening wear and announcing her tagline, which is part defensive apologia, part mission statement, part brand definition. But at the beginning, when they were editing the first season of Orange County, they went with sound bites from the show, like “I don’t wanna get old” and “  percent of the women around here have had breast implants” and “Are the police involved?” When Cohen saw the first cut, he ran to the office of Shari Levine, Bravo’s vice president of production, and told her she had to call the production company. The Housewives were going to think the producers were sabotaging them. But Levine told him the Housewives had already seen it  —   and they loved it. Cohen learned that day that people stand behind their behavior, and that trying to protect them from themselves is a fundamental act of disrespect: “These women, but maybe all women. I mean maybe all men, too I think all people want to be heard and understood. ” He learned too that people don’t need you to fight their battles, that they are entitled to them, even if you think they’re ridiculous. He learned that an audience will respond to however eccentric or stubborn or mean or dumb or kind a person is if that person is being authentic. “The things that you think might embarrass them they actually feel like, Well, I was standing up for myself,” he said. I eventually watched the episode of “Real Housewives of Orange County” that Kathleen French had warned Cohen about. It was part of a   arc in which the women go to Ireland so that one of them, Meghan, can track down her ancestors. (This is manifested as her actually tapping people on the shoulder in the street and asking if they are related to her.) Now, “Orange County,” which is the screechiest “Housewives” franchise, had experienced so far a year of immense healing, with the Housewives working on forgiveness. That went right out the window on this trip. Kelly, whom I mentioned earlier, is someone prone to saying things like: “What comes before Part B?  !” She also does the old    “What’s on your shirt?” and when you look down, she flicks you in the nose. Well, it was one such flick, which she administered to Vicki, that plunged the whole trip into darkness. Kelly wanted to know why Heather was so uptight about it, since Jews are supposed to have a good sense of humor. Heather called Kelly racist, and Kelly, of course, said: “I’m not being racist. I’m Mexican. ” Eventually, Tamra got involved, and Kelly said, “No wonder why her daughter isn’t talking to her,” which prompted Tamra to lunge for Kelly and curse and hit her, and they were all kicked out of the department store they were in. Something Cohen knows, a belief that began to take root in him back when he was watching “All My Children” with his mother, was that people who interacted would always create something interesting. That’s why he doesn’t understand why anyone would think that “Real Housewives” wasn’t real in some way. Or that it was too crass. Had people been on a subway recently? Had they read an online comments section? If anyone was under the impression that we were still in a Jane Austen novel in terms of national discourse and manners, it wasn’t Cohen’s fault that they were in for a rude awakening. It’s all real. It wouldn’t be compelling to watch if it weren’t. Teresa Giudice was having a real breakdown when she flipped that table in New Jersey. But in New York, when Aviva Drescher got angry and threw her prosthetic leg at Le Cirque, of all places, in a   effort to make her onscreen presence more interesting, well, that was the last we saw of Aviva. “It is very real to them,” he said. “And by the way, when it’s not, they’re off the show. ” A few months after the women from Orange County returned from Ireland and watched the episodes through holes between their fingers, they pulled themselves together for the reunion. They put on clothing appropriate for Christmas dinner at the White House if it were Cinderella’s   gathered on two separate couches with Andy in the middle, folded their hands in their laps and apologized to one another. A few days after the election, Cohen began book promotion for “Superficial. ” He started with a few local appearances, including one at the 92nd Street Y, where he was interviewed onstage by Sarah Jessica Parker. He had spent election night at her house, actually, and as soon as it became clear who the winner was, Cohen left the room to eat. A few days later, his optimism had mostly returned. Anderson Cooper told me when we met in St. Louis, “I think Oprah said to Andy, ‘You carry the light.’ When I heard that, I was like, That’s really true. ” Onstage at the Y, he had already come around enough to say that he thinks that at heart, Donald Trump is a Democrat. The liberal, largely Jewish crowd, who had been reading about the terrifying increase of hate crimes since the election and had begun to feel as if the world were closing in faster than they’d expected, responded with silence. We met at Cafe Cluny again a week later, and I asked him if he had noticed the silence. He said he didn’t get it. He wanted to know why everyone he knew was so surprised about all of this. I’d been watching the show, hadn’t I? I’d seen Tamra from “Orange County” call Alexis “Jesus Jugs,” hadn’t I? How was that different from calling Hillary Clinton “Crooked Hillary”? I’d watched in the primaries as Trump defended the size of his penis, right? “Wouldn’t that be the province of the Housewives if they were men?” He was right. Trump was not not like one of Cohen’s Housewives. He knew he had to be entertaining to stay on the show. He was willing to say anything to get his contract extended. Throughout his campaign, he pulled out the “I know something, but I’m not going to say it now” trick, most recently employed by Bethenny Frankel about dirt she has but won’t reveal about both Dorinda and Jules at the last “New York” reunion. At the debates, the candidates fought for time to speak and demanded that they be allowed the time they were promised, which is what happens at the reunions. When Cohen saw that, he told me, he thought, Lester Holt, I feel your pain. Anderson Cooper was a moderator of a debate in St. Louis that ended with the candidates saying something nice about each other, which is exactly how Cohen ends some “Real Housewives” reunions. It was one thing when people were copying his format for a talk show and pretending it was theirs, but now life is copying his format, and he’s still not quite getting credit for it  —   just blame. But isn’t that always the way for Cohen? He’s confronted from the audience, he’s confronted by that guy in Washington, and still he’s not getting the credit for what his gift actually is, which isn’t knowing how to deviously propel national discourse into the gutter but instead delivering to viewers what they want before they know they want it. And still, they mess up the name of his show, calling it “Watch What Happens Now. ” They accuse him of ruining America, when he carries the light. Even Oprah said it. Andy Cohen didn’t invent our society. To think that is to have missed the entire point of him. He simply predicted it. He saw it coming before we did, and he taped it. He has a lack of judgment about the way the world works, and therefore doesn’t have the willful ignorance that the rest of us do  —   yes, we’d seen Tamra call Alexis “Jesus Jugs,” and we insisted it was a tacky anomaly. But it wasn’t. It was the way the world works now. Andy Cohen isn’t how our culture got this way. He is simply a walking seismograph of it. Back at Cafe Cluny, I took one of the pieces of chocolate that came with the check he left the other two alone. I asked him what was going to happen next. He shrugged and opened his mouth to say something, pausing for what felt like a minute. Then he told me that it was all going to be O. K. and I decided to believe him.

0 - SUNDARBANS NATIONAL PARK, Bangladesh Two hundred years ago, the first cholera pandemic emerged from these   mangrove swamps. It began in 1817, after the British East India Company sent thousands of workers deep into the remote Sundarbans, part of the Ganges River Delta, to log the jungles and plant rice. These brackish waters are the cradle of Vibrio cholerae, a bacterium that clings to human intestines and emits a toxin so virulent that the body will pour all of its fluids into the gut to flush it out. Water loss turns victims ashen their eyes sink into their sockets, and their blood turns black and congeals in their capillaries. Robbed of electrolytes, their hearts lose their beat. Victims die of shock and organ failure, sometimes in as little as six hours after the first abdominal rumblings. Cholera probably had festered here for eons. Since that first escape, it has circled the world in seven pandemic cycles that have killed tens of millions. Artists of the 19th century often depicted it as a skeleton with a scythe and victims heaped at its feet. It stalked revelers at a masked ball in Heinrich Heine’s “Cholera in Paris” and kills the protagonist in Thomas Mann’s “Death in Venice. ” Outbreaks forced London, New York and other cities to create vast public water systems, transforming civic life. Today cholera garners panicky headlines when it strikes unexpectedly in places like Ethiopia or Haiti. But it is a continuing threat in nearly 70 countries, where more than one billion people are at risk. Now, thanks largely to efforts that began in cholera’s birthplace, a way to finally conquer the   plague is in sight. A treatment protocol so effective that it saves 99. 9 percent of all victims was pioneered here. The World Health Organization estimates that it has saved about 50 million lives in the past four decades. Just as important, after 35 years of work, researchers in Bangladesh and elsewhere have developed an effective cholera vaccine. It has been accepted by the W. H. O. and stockpiled for epidemics like the one that struck Haiti in 2010. Soon, there may be enough to begin routine vaccination in countries where the disease has a permanent foothold. Merely creating that stockpile  —   even of a few million doses  —   profoundly improved the way the world fought cholera, Dr. Margaret Chan, secretary general of the W. H. O. said last year. Ready access to the vaccine has made countries less tempted to cover up outbreaks to protect tourism, she said. That has sped up emergency responses and attracted more vaccine makers, lowering costs. “More cholera vaccines have been deployed over the last two years than in the previous 15 years combined,” Dr. Chan said. The treatment advances relied heavily on research and testing done at the International Center for Diarrheal Disease Research, known as the ICDDR, B, in Dhaka. Although Dhaka may not be the first place one might look to find a public health revolution, the center is famous among experts in gut diseases. While its upper levels are quiet and scholarly, the center’s ground floor is the world’s largest diarrhea hospital. Its vast wards treat 220, 000 patients a year, almost all of whom recover within 36 hours. Doctors there save hundreds of lives a day. The ICDDR, B was originally the Cholera Research Laboratory, founded in 1960 by the United States as part of that era’s “soft diplomacy. ” Research hospitals were built in friendly countries both to save lives locally and to act as sentinels for diseases that might threaten America. The wards, which in the rainy season extend into   tents in the parking lot, contain long rows of “cholera cots. ” On each iron or wood frame is a plastic sheet with a hole in the middle. A bucket beneath the hole catches diarrhea, while another beside the cot fills with vomit. An IV pole completes the setup. Defying expectations, the ward smells only of the antiseptic that the floors are constantly mopped with. Patients with severe watery diarrhea arrive around the clock, many of them carried in  —   limp, dehydrated and barely conscious  —   by friends or family. A nurse sees each one immediately, and those close to death get an IV line inserted within 30 seconds. It contains a blend of glucose, electrolytes and water. Cholera spurs the intestines to violently flush themselves, but it does not actually damage the gut cells. If the fluid is replaced and the bacteria flushed out or killed by antibiotics, the patient is usually fine. Within hours, patients start to revive. As soon as they can swallow, they get an antibiotic and start drinking a rehydration solution. Most walk out within a day. The techniques perfected here are so effective that the ICDDR, B has sent training teams to 17 cholera outbreaks in the past decade. Usually, the only patients who stay long in the hospital are infants so malnourished that another bout of diarrhea would kill them. They live for up to a month in a separate ward with their mothers, who are taught how to cook nutritious porridges from the cheapest lentils, squash, onions, greens and oil. Only about 20 percent of the patients at the center have cholera. The rest usually have rotavirus, salmonella or E. coli. The same therapy saves them all, but the cholera cases are more urgent because these patients plummet so precipitously toward death. “I thought I was dying,” Mohammed Mubarak, a gaunt    printing press worker, said one afternoon from his cot. His roommates had carried him in at 7 that morning, unconscious and with no detectable pulse. Now, after six liters of intravenous solution, he was still weak but able to sit up and drink the rehydration solution and eat bits of bread and banana. “His stool is changing from   to green, so he is recovering,” said Momtaz Begum, the ward nurse who monitors the buckets and makes sure patients take in as much liquid as they lose. Mr. Mubarak had first fallen ill at about 2 a. m. a few hours after he drank tap water with his dinner. “Usually I drink safe water, filtered water,” he explained. “But I drank the city water last night. I think that is what did this. ” Cholera, born in the swamps, arrived long ago in Dhaka. The city is home to more that 15 million, and a third of the population lives in slums. In some places, water pipes made of rubbery plastic are pierced by illegal connections that suck in sewage from the gutters they traverse and carry pathogens down the line to new victims, like Mr. Mubarak. Vibrio cholerae travels from person to person via fecal matter. In 1854, the epidemiologist John Snow famously traced cases to a single well dug near a cesspit in which a mother had washed the diaper of a baby who died of cholera and nd convinced officials to remove the well’s pump handle. Because cholera is a constant threat to hundreds of millions of people lacking safe drinking water in China, India, Nigeria and many other countries, scientists have long sought a more powerful weapon: a cheap, effective vaccine. Now they have one. Injected cholera vaccines were first invented in the 1800s and were long required for entry into some countries. But many scientists suspected they did not work, and in the 1970s studies overseen by the ICDDR, B confirmed that. In the 1980s, a Swedish scientist, Dr. Jan Holmgren, invented an oral vaccine that worked an impressive 85 percent of the time. But it was expensive to make and had to be drunk with a large glass of buffer solution to protect it from stomach acid. Transporting tanks of buffer was impractical. Making matters worse, it was fizzy, and poor Bangladeshi children who had never tasted soft drinks would spit it out as soon as it tickled their noses. In 1986, a Vietnamese scientist, Dr. Dang Duc Trach, asked for the formula, believing he could make a bufferless version. Dr. Holmgren and Dr. John D. Clemens, an American vaccine expert who at the time was a research scientist for the ICDDR, B, obliged. “This isn’t an elegant vaccine  —   it’s just a bunch of killed cells, technology that’s been around since Louis Pasteur,” said Dr. Clemens, who is now the ICDDR, B’s executive director. He and Dr. Holmgren lost touch with Dr. Dang, largely because of Vietnam’s isolation in those days. But seven years later, Dr. Dang notified them that he had made a new version of the vaccine. He had tested it on 70, 000 residents of Hue, in central Vietnam, and had found it to be 60 percent effective. Although his was not as effective as Dr. Holmgren’s, it cost only 25 cents a dose. If enough people in an area can be made immune through vaccination, outbreaks often stop spontaneously. In 1997, Vietnam became the first  —   and thus far, only  —   country to provide cholera vaccine to its citizens routinely, not just in emergencies. Cases dropped sharply, according to a 2014 study, and in 2003 cholera vanished from Hue, where the campaign focused most heavily. But Dr. Dang had not conducted a classic clinical trial, and Vietnam’s vaccine factory did not meet W. H. O. standards, so no United Nations agency was allowed to buy his vaccine. Because no pharmaceutical company had an incentive to pay for trials or factories, his invention languished in “the valley of death”  —   the expensive gap between a product that works in a lab and a   version safe for millions. In 1999, Dr. Clemens approached what is now the Bill  Melinda Gates Foundation, which was just getting organized. “They were literally operating out of a basement then,” he said. “I got a letter from Bill Gates Sr. It was very relaxed, sort of, ‘Here’s $40 million. Would you mind sending me a report once in a while?’ “But without that,” Dr. Clemens continued, “this wouldn’t have seen the light of day. ” With that money, Dr. Clemens reformulated Dr. Dang’s vaccine, conducted a successful clinical trial in Calcutta and found an Indian company, Shantha Biotechnics, that could make it to W. H. O. standards. Rolled out in 2009 under the name Shanchol, it came in a vial about the size of a chess rook, needed no buffer and cost less than $2 a dose. Even so, there was little interest, even from the W. H. O. The vaccine lacked the publicity campaign that pharmaceutical companies throw behind commercial products, and “cholera ward care” was saving many lives  —   when it could be organized. The new vaccine was not used in a cholera outbreak in Zimbabwe in 2009, or initially in Haiti’s explosive outbreak in 2010. The “valley of death” lengthened: Without customers, Shantha could not afford to build a bigger factory. The impasse was broken only when Dr. Paul Farmer, a founder of Partners in Health, which has worked in central Haiti since 1987, began publicly berating the W. H. O. for not moving faster. The agency approved Shanchol in 2011, and since then, the vaccine has slowly gained acceptance. In 2013, an emergency stockpile was started, and the GAVI Alliance committed $115 million to raise it to six million doses. The vaccine is now used in Haiti, and has been deployed in outbreaks in Iraq, South Sudan and elsewhere. A second version, Euvichol, from South Korea, was approved in 2015. And later this year, Bangladesh  —   where it all began  —   hopes to begin wiping out its persistent cholera. A local company has begun making a domestic version of the vaccine, called Vaxchol. Dr. Firdausi Qadri, a leading ICDDR, B researcher, estimated last year that success there would require almost 200 million doses. The world finally has a vaccine that, with routine administration, could end one of history’s great scourges. But what will happen is still hazy. With 1. 4 billion people at risk, the potential cost of vaccination in   countries is enormous. And the disease tends to move, surging and vanishing among the many causes of diarrhea. Even Bill Gates, who paid for much of the research, has asked: “We actually have a cholera vaccine, but where should it be used?” Looking back on his long struggle to prove the vaccine’s value, and then to win acceptance, Dr. Clemens offered an explanation that blended wistfulness and cynicism. “We’re probably not bad scientists,” he said, “but we were lousy advocates. “If this disease had been in American kids, there would have been trials as fast as the Salk polio vaccine. ”

0 - They called him the Beast. David Fajgenbaum was the fittest of his friends at the University of Pennsylvania’s medical school, a    gym addict and former quarterback at Georgetown. His mammoth hands seemed more suited to spiraling footballs than the fine fingerwork a    might need. He had endurance to match, taking multiple hits and returning to the field to play on. “This guy was a physical specimen,” said his former roommate, Grant Mitchell, who used to walk to work with him. When they would arrive at the hospital for his obstetrics rotation, his friend recalled, “he would basically coerce me into doing   on the tree outside. ” In July 2010, that all changed. The    woke up at night drenched in sweat. His lymph nodes were swollen. He felt stabs of abdominal pain, and odd red bumps began sprouting across his chest. Most bizarre of all, he felt very tired  —   so tired that he began slipping into empty exam rooms between patients, stealing   naps to get through the day. “Guys, I think I’m dying,” he recalled telling his friends. A visit to the emergency room confirmed his fears. A doctor told him that his liver, kidneys and bone marrow were not working properly. Even more troubling, the doctor had no idea why his body was failing. “What do you think is going on?” he remembers the doctor asking him. Pursuing the answer to that question, it turned out, would become his life’s work. It would transform Dr. Fajgenbaum from a patient on the brink of death five different times, whose illness stumped specialist after specialist, to one of the leading researchers in his field. He has even used himself as his own test subject, and may have discovered a treatment for his rare disease. His story, which has been circulating inside medicine, is more than one person’s remarkable journey, however. It offers a look into the world of rare diseases, a corner of medicine that continues to frustrate  —   and flummox  —   those who seek cures for obscure conditions. About 95 percent of all rare diseases have no approved drug treatments. Fewer than 8, 000 people in the United States are found to have Dr. Fajgenbaum’s condition in any given year. But taken as a whole, rare diseases are not unusual: An estimated 30 million people in the country  —   or about 10 percent of the population  —   are living with one of the nearly 7, 000 rare diseases that have been identified. Prompted by financial incentives passed by Congress, the drug industry is hotly pursuing treatments for a throng of rare diseases. That has led to breakthroughs in several conditions, including cystic fibrosis and spinal muscular atrophy. Nevertheless, with a small number of subjects to study and relatively few people to sell new drugs to, many rare diseases are overlooked by doctors and scientists, hampered by a lack of resources and public awareness. Dr. Fajgenbaum’s condition is one of the many that have been given relatively little attention. Initially, doctors thought he had a common form of cancer. A CT scan  —   a series of images that give doctors a clearer picture of what is going on inside the body  —   revealed a body riddled with enlarged lymph nodes, a hallmark of lymphoma. The news struck a particularly cruel blow: Only a few years earlier, while Dr. Fajgenbaum was in college, his mother died of brain cancer. He declined rapidly as his immune system went haywire. A retinal hemorrhage, a type of ministroke, temporarily blinded his left eye. Fluids leaked out of his blood vessels, a sign that his liver was failing. Over the next two weeks, he gained about 70 pounds of extra fluid and his brain fogged over. For those who knew him as the Beast, the transformation was jarring. “Even when he got sicker and sicker and eventually went into the hospital, it was kind of like this, oh, weird, Dave must have some really awful virus  —   that’s one hell of a flu,” his friend Dr. Mitchell said. When Dr. Fajgenbaum’s brain started slowing down, Dr. Mitchell said, the severity of the illness sunk in. “I would ask him a simple question, and he would answer in a couple words, like 30 seconds to a minute later,” he said. Dr. Mitchell and the other medical students scoured textbooks and the internet, searching for clues. The top medical experts at Penn, meanwhile, were not having much more luck. Lymphoma was just one theory. Others thought it might be a severe case of lupus or even mononucleosis. But test after test was inconclusive. Finally, the doctors tried a huge dose of steroids. Slowly, his body began to fight its way back. His kidneys and liver began functioning again, and the extra fluid receded. Seven weeks after he was admitted, Dr. Fajgenbaum walked out of the hospital. It was September 2010. “I remember asking the doctor, saying, ‘What was this? ’” he said. “And I remember the doctor saying, ‘We don’t know what it was, but let’s just hope it doesn’t come back. ’” It took only one month for symptoms to come rushing back, while he was convalescing at his childhood home in Raleigh, N. C. Doctors there shipped a piece of his lymph node to the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota, where pathologists finally pinpointed his disease. The condition, called Castleman disease, was so rare that doctors at the hospital in Raleigh had no experience with it. Castleman disease had been known since the 1950s but has remained largely a mystery. A hallmark of the condition is enlarged lymph nodes, and most people with the disease  —   about    —   have a form that affects just one part of the body and can usually be cured through surgery. The form ravaging Dr. Fajgenbaum’s body  —   multicentric Castleman disease  —   is even more rare and deadly. Only about 1, 200 to 1, 500 people are discovered to have it every year in the United States. It defied classification, occupying a no man’s land between cancer and immune disease. Doctors weren’t sure of the cause in patients like him: Some believed it was a type of cancer, while others thought it was an inherited genetic disorder, or was triggered by a virus. One thing was clear: The disease was deadly. Only about 65 percent of people with the condition live for five years after it is diagnosed, studies have shown. Over the next few years, Dr. Fajgenbaum alternated between extended periods of relative health and frightening relapses. His condition stumped even leading experts in the disease, people like Dr. Frits van Rhee of Little Rock, Ark. who has treated the largest number of patients  —   about 100  —   with Castleman. The tools that Dr. van Rhee and others had were blunt and harmful in their own right. More than once, Dr. Fajgenbaum underwent a devastating,   course of chemotherapy that annihilated his immune system in an effort to knock his disease into remission. Dr. Fajgenbaum was also granted emergency access to siltuximab, a drug that Johnson  Johnson was developing for people with his form of multicentric Castleman disease, which would  be approved in 2014. That year, in 2011, Dr. van Rhee secured a rare exception to try it on Dr. Fajgenbaum. But the drug, like other previous treatments, did not work. Dr. Fajgenbaum was undaunted. With the zeal he once devoted to   a personal best  —   375 pounds, reached six months before he first fell ill  —   he dove into the scientific research on Castleman disease and began to familiarize himself with the world’s top experts. On Sundays, his roommate tried to coax Dr. Fajgenbaum out of his bedroom, with its white board covered in notes, organizational plans tacked to the wall. He rarely succeeded. “I’m on the couch watching TV, and Dave is just cranking away on Castleman,” Dr. Mitchell recalled. The more Dr. Fajgenbaum learned, he said, the more he realized how much the field that studied Castleman was in disarray. Researchers focusing on the disease used different terminology to describe the condition, making it difficult to compare published work. Leading experts weren’t in regular communication, and studies were being done over again, even though previous ones had failed. “It became just abundantly clear that just because you have smart people thinking about a problem doesn’t mean that it’s coordinated at all,” he said. One of the people he called was Dr. Thomas Uldrick, a clinical researcher at the National Cancer Institute who had studied multicentric Castleman disease. The two struck up a correspondence. “Clearly he was a very bright medical student, and he was scared of dying from this disease,” Dr. Uldrick recalled. He also began collaborating with Dr. van Rhee, who knew that Dr. Fajgenbaum was a different kind of patient after he arrived armed with charts, graphs, timelines and slide presentations. “There are patients who keep meticulous records,” Dr. van Rhee said with a chuckle, “but he was definitely in the top 1 percent. ” In spring 2013 Dr. Fajgenbaum earned his medical degree, and a few months later he entered the Wharton School at Penn, reasoning that, to solve the tangled mystery of Castleman disease, business smarts would serve him well. But in December of that year he got sick again, with his blood platelets dropping so low that he barely avoided a fatal brain bleed. This time, though, he was able to use his relapse to further his search for a cure. For months, Dr. Fajgenbaum had been collecting weekly blood samples that served as snapshots of his immune system, tabulating the results in a spreadsheet and adding them to a detailed slide presentation that he had been preparing since he received the diagnosis. And when it was clear the disease had returned, he persuaded his doctors to remove a piece of a lymph node, test it and save it for future research. After a round of chemotherapy, he improved enough to be discharged and started looking into what secrets the tests might reveal. It turned out that five months before he started noticing symptoms in December, his T cells  —   one of the key weapons in the body’s immune arsenal  —   had starting activating, preparing for a fight even though there was no apparent threat. Then, about three months before his relapse, he noticed that he had started producing more VEGF, a protein that instructs the body to make more blood vessels, and is another sign of an immune system gearing up. These two hints gave him an idea: Maybe the problem was with one of the body’s communication lines, the one that triggered production of VEGF and also told the T cells to begin activating. If Dr. Fajgenbaum could get his body to shut down that communication line  —   known as the mTOR pathway  —   he might be able to stop his immune system from overreacting and prevent a relapse. The discovery was exhilarating. “I felt like I was part of steering the ship,” Dr. Fajgenbaum said. “This time I was part of this team. ” With this major clue in hand, he and his doctors turned to potential treatments, existing drugs that were known to shut down the mTOR pathway. The one that seemed the best option was practically hiding in plain sight. Sirolimus, also known as Rapamune, was commonly given to kidney transplant patients to prevent their bodies from rejecting the organ. The drug had been on the market for years and was known to have few serious side effects. “I wouldn’t think I ever could have prescribed this to another patient, or told a patient to try it, because we just didn’t have very much data,” Dr. Fajgenbaum said. “But at this stage, I’d had four episodes, and I’d failed everything the doctors had ever given me. ” In choosing to become his own test subject, Dr. Fajgenbaum was following a long line of medical researchers who have experimented on themselves. At the turn of the 20th century, government researchers studying yellow fever in Cuba allowed themselves to be bitten by mosquitoes who harbored the disease one researcher caught the fever and died. In 1929, Dr. Werner Forssmann inserted a catheter into the vein of his arm and guided it to his heart to prove that the procedure worked (he shared in a Nobel Prize for his work in 1956). As recently as 2005, Dr. Barry Marshall won the Nobel after drinking a broth infected with bacteria to prove that it caused ulcers. This activist approach, Dr. Uldrick said, did not sit well with everyone. “There was some tension between the various doctors about who was driving the boat,” he said. But the idea that Dr. Fajgenbaum needed to try something new was unanimous: Chemotherapy had worked three times, but the powerful drugs take a heavy toll and can themselves cause cancer if given too often. Dr. Fajgenbaum eventually prevailed. In January 2014, he stopped taking his old cancer drugs and started on sirolimus. Six months passed, then a year. The weekly blood tests showed that his immune system was returning to normal. Dr. Fajgenbaum, his health improving, returned to the other challenges that were hampering progress in the field of Castleman disease. He started the Castleman Disease Collaborative Network, a nonprofit whose mission was to prioritize and coordinate research into the disease, which operates out of the Perelman School of Medicine at Penn. Dr. Fajgenbaum, an assistant professor of medicine at the school, and his collaborators assembled an advisory panel of the world’s experts in the disease and set an agenda for answering the most pressing questions. First on the list is figuring out the cause: Is the disease genetic, a form of cancer or caused by a virus? As always, the work is intensely personal. Last summer, he drove to Allentown, Pa. to collect a blood sample from a patient with Castleman disease. He placed the vials in his vest pocket, explaining that he needed to keep the blood warm so the tests he had planned would work properly. “You remind me of a mother hen,” the patient said with a laugh. That gave him an idea: Dr. Fajgenbaum sat on the vials as he drove two hours back to Philadelphia, the car heater cranked up to ensure they were warm. It was a sweaty ride back, but worth it. “These samples are precious,” he said. In medical research, discoveries come slowly and take twists and turns that no one saw coming. Seasoned researchers have learned to rein in their optimism and to know that true breakthroughs can take years, if not decades, to realize. Not Dr. Fajgenbaum. “I almost wish that every disease had a David to be a part of the charge,” said Dr. Mary Jo Lechowicz, a professor at the Emory University School of Medicine, who has studied Castleman disease and serves on the network’s advisory board. Dr. Fajgenbaum’s   mission to take on his own disease is also typical of the   world, said Max Bronstein, the chief advocacy and science policy officer at the EveryLife Foundation for Rare Diseases in Novato, Calif. “A lot of    patient organizations emerge to take on these huge challenges in rare diseases,” he said. “I don’t think there’s one correct model for each disease there’s been so many different approaches. ” Last month, Dr. Fajgenbaum marked his   anniversary since starting on sirolimus, a period more than twice as long as any of his other remissions. “I feel 100 percent,” he said. These days, Dr. Fajgenbaum, now 31, walks through the hallways of Penn’s medical center, his frame again projecting the easy confidence of the athlete he once was. But he jokes that he would have to pull out photos of his days as a quarterback to explain to people why his friends still call him the Beast. Now, he said, every time he tries to exercise, his mind wanders back to an email he needs to write or a call he needs to make. “It’s not because I don’t have the energy to do it it’s because all of my energy is going toward this disease,” he said. Not everyone is convinced that sirolimus is what has been keeping him healthy. Dr. van Rhee noted that while the results in Dr. Fajgenbaum are promising, his is just one case and treatments need to be proven in many more people. “I think the finding is very interesting,” he said, “but we need to see whether a similar mechanism is active in other patients. ” But Dr. Fajgenbaum said he grew more confident every day that it is the drug that is helping. He has begun sharing his experience with more doctors and researchers, is conducting laboratory tests to see if the drug is likely to work in other patients and has started writing an article about his experience for a medical journal. Soon, he hopes, doctors will begin prescribing the drug to other patients. Dr. Fajgenbaum is optimistic about the drug’s chances but is aware medical science is unpredictable. “Who knows maybe it will work for only a small percentage,” he said. “So we’ve still got a lot of work ahead of us. ” He now oversees the network’s research from his office in the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, five floors above the emergency room where he first learned his body was falling apart. It is also the same building where he spent weeks in the I. C. U. so sick that he said his final goodbyes to friends and family. At first, when he learned his office would be in the same building, he felt anxious, unsure if he wanted the constant reminder of the ordeal he had endured. A few months ago, Dr. Fajgenbaum was called to the I. C. U. to meet a patient who had just found out he had Castleman disease. He spoke to the patient about enrolling him in a new study, and as he looked out the window, realized the view looked familiar. On his way out, he bumped into a nurse who remembered him. She noted that he had stayed in the same room as a patient. Ultimately, he said, he is glad for the proximity. “I didn’t think that I would ever get to leave the hospital, and now here I am, fighting back,” he said. “It’s the ultimate motivator. ”

0 - LOS ANGELES  —   Michael Govan stood in a   gallery scattered with paintings and crates at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, his arms gesturing at blank white walls, his face furled in thought. Mr. Govan is the director of the museum, but on this bright morning, he was focused on one single project: the installation of an exhibition of paintings by Agnes Martin. No detail was too small for Mr. Govan as he squinted his eyes and directed two workers, hoisting a framed canvas against a wall. “Two inches higher,” Mr. Govan said. Still not right. “A little to the left. ” Finally, Mr. Govan nodded his approval as the work was positioned into place. “Awesome. ’’ Mr. Govan could not have been more intricately involved in the details of this retrospective, as he is with pretty much everything that happens on the museum campus on Wilshire Boulevard. He knew Ms. Martin before her death in 2004 and has long adored her work. He spent months visiting collectors at their homes, explaining why they should lend their Martins to this public exhibition  —   fixating on such details as his insistence that paintings not be put under glass, which, he is quick to tell you, obscures the fine lines of her art. (“Agnes Martin would be horrified to see her work under glass,” he said. “Horrified. ”) Mr. Govan curated the exhibition, which closed after a successful run in the fall, right down to the last caption and light fixture. Mr. Govan needed the diversion. As this new year begins, he is consumed with an even more urgent and consequential campaign, one that could help define not only Los Angeles’s position on the world’s art stage but Mr. Govan’s standing in his adopted city: a $600 million reconstruction of Lacma. It is as ambitious in its architectural aspirations as in its cost. The project, a decidedly disruptive and not entirely admired design by the architect Peter Zumthor, is testing all the social, political and   skills that Mr. Govan has acquired after 10 years of maneuvering in a West Coast caldron of art collectors, wealthy patrons, celebrities and government officials. Los Angeles can be a tough place to rally civic and philanthropic support. Walt Disney Concert Hall, the glistening, now acclaimed Frank Gehry building, was almost never built. Mr. Govan was reminded of that when, days before he triumphantly unveiled $75 million in donations to his project last spring, one of this city’s most wealthy benefactors, David Geffen, announced he had given $100 million to the Museum of Modern Art  —   in New York City. (Mr. Geffen, who has not given any money to Mr. Govan’s project, declined a request to comment for this article.) Still, Mr. Govan has gathered about $300 million in commitments, with more on the way. He said he needs to raise another $150 million by the end of 2017 for the project to continue. “It’s a big project for L. A. and there’s been a little lack of confidence that the money will be raised,” Mr. Govan said last month. “But I think just getting close to the halfway point, I’ve sensed a change in my trustees and supporters. There’s this strong sense with them that this is likely to happen. ” “I will tell you just that it is going to happen,” he said. At 53, Mr. Govan is the kind of arts executive who could probably exist only in Los Angeles. He is a celebrity in a world of celebrities, with the looks of a movie star a regular at the Tower Bar on Sunset Boulevard, its tables crowded with agents and actors and someone who, naturally enough, was a guest at last year’s Academy Awards. Mr. Govan seems as comfortable describing, with the air of a senior faculty member at a fine arts college, the latest catalog of acquisitions before an audience of donors as he is posing for the    paparazzi at Lacma   attended by Leonardo DiCaprio, Martin Scorsese and Kanye West. Mr. Govan breaks rules and celebrates the unconventional in a way that, if nothing else, draws attention to the museum and its director. What other museum director would orchestrate the   spectacle of moving a   boulder through the streets of Los Angeles at night before installing it on the museum grounds as “Levitated Mass,” a work by Michael Heizer? He has had exhibitions devoted to Tim Burton, Mr. Gehry and Robert Mapplethorpe. Average attendance has doubled since 2007, to 1. 6 million people. “I’m a provocateur,” Mr. Govan said. Sheila Kuehl, a member of the county Board of Supervisors, said Mr. Govan had changed the way people viewed this museum and the city. “People like to be part of something that looks to be new and the place to be,” she said. “And that’s what he has done with Lacma and L. A. He brings  —   the way Gustavo Dudamel does  —   excitement with him. ” Mr. Govan’s reputation is such that in the gossipy world of   museums and galleries, his name circulates as someone who might be summoned back to New York one day, where he served for 11 years as director of the Dia Art Foundation, perhaps to run the Museum of Modern Art, should that position ever open. Mr. Govan scrunched up his face at the suggestion as he sat on a gallery bench last month at the press preview of an exhibition devoted to the works of Pablo Picasso and Diego Rivera. “Why would you leave this?” Mr. Govan said, pointing first toward the bustling exhibition and then through glass doors revealing the glorious sunshine and crisp blue skies of a typical December day in Los Angeles. “To go back to Trump Tower traffic? What exactly would be the incentive? The point of this project is to make my successor feel that this is the prestigious job. ” And there may be no better example of    than the Zumthor building. Next to the La Brea Tar Pits, it has been likened to a blob, a smoky gray, elevated   swirl of galleries resting on eight pillars that would cross over Wilshire Boulevard. Joseph Giovannini, an architecture critic, has repeatedly belittled it as Lacma’s “folly” in The Los Angeles Review of Books, a barrage of particularly stinging criticism that certainly has not made Mr. Govan’s   task any easier. “Why are we even seriously considering this misguided proposition?” Mr. Giovannini demanded in one essay, adding: “This ain’t no Rialto Bridge. It’s recycled,     pumped up to monumental scale. ” It is, as Mr. Govan is quick to acknowledge, a controversial design by Mr. Zumthor, a widely admired architect. It involves tearing down three buildings from the ’60s and one from the ’80s that critics say could be rehabilitated. Mr. Govan rejects that idea, saying they are beyond repair and exults over the ambition and imagination of the design. Other people are coming around to Mr. Zumthor’s vision as it goes through its various iterations. “I didn’t like it at first, but it grew on me,” said Zev Yaroslavsky, a former member of the Board of Supervisors who was instrumental in getting the county to contribute $125 million to the building. “It’s an architectural statement whether he wants it to be or not. There are some people who don’t like Zumthor or his design. It’s going to be talked about. It’s controversial. Most great buildings are controversial. ” These kinds of ambitious projects, with their attendant   campaigns and architectural debates, may be familiar in more established cities like New York or San Francisco. (The expanded San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, which opened last spring, raised $610 million in its capital campaign, easily covering the $305 million cost of its building expansion.) But for all the growing vibrancy of its arts scene, Los Angeles still suffers a bit of a reputation as a place where there is more interest in Hollywood than Hockney, whose wealthy citizens can be stingy, and where great works of art are hidden in mansions in Malibu and Bel Air. “L. A. is a place where everything is somewhat discounted and diffuse: To get the energy to come together, to make something kind of happen for the entire city and the entire community is not so easy,” said Nicolas Berggruen, a trustee of the museum who is building a new think tank, the Berggruen Institute. For Mr. Govan’s project, an environmental quality study is underway, and plans are for demolition to begin at the end of 2018. The new museum would open in 2023, coinciding with the completion of an extension of a subway line that runs under Wilshire Boulevard, which will have a stop for the museum. All that is contingent on   continuing apace. “If we stall next year, and we don’t continue to raise money, we would be in bad shape,” Mr. Govan said in December. But, he added: “Failure is not an option. The old buildings are literally coming to the end of their natural life. ” From the start, Mr. Govan has been persistent and uncompromisingly confident. “I can’t say it strongly enough: It’s not a question of whether there’s money in L. A for such a project: There is,” Mr. Govan said, sitting in his expansive   office with a view of Wilshire Boulevard, where workers were cutting down palm trees to make way for the subway line. “The question is, will people decide that’s what they want to do with it. ” “If they do this”  —   at this, Mr. Govan paused to amend his remarks  —   “when they do this, not if  —    it will be a new   mark for collective action, for achievement in the cultural space and in the philanthropic space of Los Angeles. It is not a large goal. We’re going to do it. They are going to write the checks. And they are going to be happy to do it. ” There is a sort of cautious optimism here that Mr. Govan will be able to wrangle his money, all the more so since he announced the latest $75 million, including $50 million from Elaine Wynn, an art collector who is the   of the museum, and $25 million from A. Jerrold Perenchio, a former Univision chairman who has bequeathed the bulk of his art estate to the new museum. “I think the old days of the claim that perhaps L. A. was not  —   and more specifically, Lacma was not  —   a target of sustained contribution are increasingly behind us,” said Mark   a member of the county Board of Supervisors. The optimism reflects a growing   about this city’s cultural status, but also the skills and personal force that Mr. Govan  —   with an intensity belied by an easygoing smile  —   has brought with him from New York. “It’s going to take a couple of very significant donors to get this over the hump,” said David C. Bohnett, a wealthy philanthropist and board trustee. He added, “It would be much harder if there wasn’t the enthusiasm and the unanimous support of the board. ” A conversation with Mr. Govan can be an exhausting torrent of ideas and provocations, from his proclamation that the city’s homeless crisis could be solved, given the wealth and intellectual capital here, to what seemed an almost offhand idea of building a Frank Gehry skyscraper across from the museum, which would tower over a charming,   neighborhood of mission revival homes. “There’s not a city in America that will look as different in 30 years as L. A. will look,” Mr. Govan said. “They are tearing down whole city blocks as we are speaking. I love it. ” “It’s changing,” he said. “Don’t you see it before your eyes? Out your window? Since it’s going to change, what’s it going to change into? I’m not sure I know. I am certainly drawn to the fact that each of us is going to have a little impact on it. ” Members of his Board of Trustees say meetings with Mr. Govan veer into tutorials on the history of art. “Whenever we are together, it’s like after we finish doing our Lacma business, he gets this drug dealer look in his eyes and is like, ‘You want to go so see some art? ’” Ms. Wynn said. “I think what’s driving him is this sense of history and timing. Michael accurately perceives that the pulse of newness and creativity is happening in L. A. now. ” Mr. Govan is clearly an admirer of Los Angeles, even as he acknowledges its challenges. “When I moved here, people in New York said to me, ‘L. A. is   and everybody does their own thing it’s not a good place to do a public big museum,’” he said. “There was this rap on L. A.  —   and I think some of this is true  —   that it is a wonderful place to be a creative individual. You have tremendous freedom to work on your own, you can be anonymous, and you can be eccentric. But what L. A. has not done well is the collective of people working together for public goals. The museum world is just a reflection of that. It’s mostly been people doing things on their own. ” Mr. Govan’s campaign comes as the Los Angeles art world is churning. The Broad Museum, exhibiting Eli and Edythe Broad’s collection of modern art, opened downtown in 2015, and on the other side of the cultural tracks, Hauser  Wirth took over a sprawling old flour mill in the Arts District, turning it into a   gallery that is already crowded on weekends. This city is awaiting the April opening of a private art museum from Maurice and Paul Marciano, Guess   in a renovated Masonic Temple in Koreatown. The Santa Monica Museum of Art is moving to the downtown Arts District this fall, with a new name: the Institute of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles. And George Lucas, the filmmaker, after years of “site wars,” recently announced he would bring his Museum of Narrative Art to Exposition Park and fund the project  —   about $1 billion  —   himself. “There’s no question that the art scene in Los Angeles has become dramatically elevated on the global stage,” said Casey Wasserman, an entertainment executive and museum trustee. “It’s our time. ” Mr. Govan said that Los Angeles stood out today as a city where art is being made  —   as artists flock here to take advantage of the light and the space  —   rather than a place where it is being shared with the public. “You could argue that there is no city that is more vibrant,” he said. “You may argue there are cities as vibrant  —   Berlin is very vibrant New York City outside of Manhattan is very vibrant. ” But he said that alone does not make Los Angeles the cultural capital it aspires to be. “I say this to my board: ‘You can’t just be boastful and say L. A. is going to be one of the greatest cultural cities on earth. That’s not a forgone conclusion. Even with all the artists. You can’t sit back and watch. That’s why the museum is important. ’” There are few people who would quarrel with his record so far. “His vision has been to turn the Lacma campus into a center for L. A. and it’s working,” Mr. Yaroslavsky said. “It has indeed become L. A.’s living room, a magnet. And when the Zumthor museum opens, it will exponentially increase the power of that magnet. ” Mr. Bohnett said that Mr. Govan has “deep and established East Coast roots” but that no matter the temptation of working in a place like New York, he could not see him leaving. “Where is the place he can make his biggest mark?” Mr. Bohnett said. “It’s Los Angeles. ”

0 - WASHINGTON  —   Judge Neil M. Gorsuch’s first taste of    Washington politics was bitter and lingering. He was 15 years old and his mother was a   official in the Reagan administration caught in an ugly showdown with Congress. When she was forced to step down, her reputation in tatters, young Neil was furious. “You should never have resigned,” he told his mother, Anne Gorsuch Burford, by her later account. “You didn’t do anything wrong. You only did what the president ordered. Why are you quitting? You raised me not to be a quitter. Why are you a quitter?” More than three decades later, Judge Gorsuch, a federal appeals court judge in Denver, has been nominated to the Supreme Court by President Trump and faces a political culture even more caustic than the one that destroyed his mother’s public career. Like her, he is a committed conservative and can expect strong opposition, but where she was bold and brash, he has advanced to the pinnacle of the judiciary with understatement and polish. Now 49, he arrives at his own moment of testing as a child of the Reagan revolution who saw up close the promise and the perils. He inherited a frontier skepticism of government rooted in his home of Colorado and nurtured in Washington during the 1980s. An examination of his early, formative years finds that he swam in the liberal waters of Columbia and Harvard and rebelled against the dominant thinking to develop a fully formed conservative philosophy that has propelled him to the threshold of the Supreme Court. Those early years shaped his views on the law and life and provided a searing lesson in the realities of the political world. Despite the family ordeal, friends and relatives said, he emerged from the crucible of his youth tempered about politics yet not soured on public service. He decided to pursue goals similar to his mother’s if only by a different path. The first woman to lead the Environmental Protection Agency, Ms. Burford argued that states were better custodians of resources and that market forces would bring more discipline to regulation. As she cut spending and pared back rules, critics called her an enemy of the environment. Her downfall came when, at White House direction, she refused to turn over documents related to a   program. Congress cited her for contempt. “It was an example to him of what the realpolitik of Washington could be like,” said Richard M. Segal, a Harvard Law School classmate who is now a lawyer in San Diego. “He viewed his mother as an environmentalist, and his mother viewed herself as an environmentalist. And meanwhile she was made the poster child of the view that the Reagan administration was just out there to rape the environment. ” The teenager was his mother’s conscience. “Neil knew from the beginning the seriousness of my problems,” she wrote in a memoir before her death in 2004. He was “smart as a whip” and “had an unerring sense of fairness, as do many people his age. ” When she resigned, “he was really upset. ” By most accounts, he did not dwell on it later in life, but it clearly echoed in his work. In preparing a moot court brief at Harvard on workplace safety, he tried to add material concerning the E. P. A. that did not fit, recalled a classmate, Ellen M. Bublick, who is now a law professor at the University of Arizona. In his time as an appeals court judge in Denver, his most notable writings have concerned the power of government regulators. “We talked about that prior history in relation to that,” Professor Bublick said. “He definitely was proud of his mom and had a sense that in the Reagan era certain people took a fall for him in order to protect him. And I think that was really his view of what happened to his mom. ” Neil McGill Gorsuch’s earliest years were spent in the West, where at Rocky Mountain campsites and fishing streams he internalized a faith in rugged individualism. He grew up in a     house in the east Denver neighborhood of Hilltop. His parents, Anne and David Gorsuch, were lawyers who had three children: Neil in 1967, Stephanie in 1969 and J. J. in 1973. His mother raised them Catholic his father was not religious. (Judge Gorsuch is now Episcopalian, according to his brother, possibly inspired by his time studying at Oxford University.) Studious but not standoffish, Neil shared a bedroom with his brother and attended Christ the King, a Roman Catholic school. Relatives and friends recalled him lugging stacks of books and once rounding the baseball diamond in   cowboy boots after leaving his athletic shoes at home. “If anybody was going to be the president, it was going to be Neil Gorsuch,” said Gina Carbone, 49, a classmate. In 1976, Ms. Gorsuch was elected to the State Legislature, often aligning herself with a small but powerful group of conservatives, called the “House Crazies,” who were determined to cut taxes and loosen regulations. Women’s groups supported her campaign, but in office she led a fight to kill the Colorado State Commission on Women. Fervently   she was, one politician told The Washington Post in 1983, “almost paranoid about any kind of abortion legislation. ” She rose quickly. “She was very prominent in the shaping of policy,” said Steve Durham, a leader of the House Crazies. She had a “knack and ability to get along with people and put them at ease. ” But she was famously tough. The Rocky Mountain News wrote that she “could kick a bear to death with her bare feet. ” After two terms, Ms. Gorsuch became one of three Coloradans to take prominent posts in the Reagan administration, along with James G. Watt, the interior secretary, and Robert Burford, the director of the Bureau of Land Management. Called the “Colorado mafia,” they managed the nation’s natural resources with a fierce belief that the government had gone too far in regulating private enterprise. It was widely believed that they had the backing of Joseph Coors, the conservative Colorado beer magnate. By the time Ms. Gorsuch moved to Washington in 1981, she was headed for a divorce, and the children toggled between the capital and Colorado. It was an adjustment for children used to the informal ways of the West. “All of a sudden we were across the country, having to dress up in coats and ties and having to act like   at prep school,” said Michael Trent, a Californian whose father was deputy transportation secretary at the time and who found in Mr. Gorsuch a similar spirit. The two boys took walks after dinner discussing the world. “The two of us were huge fans of Reagan,” said Mr. Trent, who was later best man at Judge Gorsuch’s wedding and made the judge godfather to his children. “And it was because of our family upbringings. It was so much a part of our lives at the time. ” Mr. Gorsuch soon had a stepfather when his mother married Mr. Burford, whom she had met in the State Legislature. Known for wearing furs and smoking two packs of cigarettes a day, Ms. Gorsuch became a prominent face of the new administration as she cut back lawsuits against polluters and tried to relax parts of the Clean Air Act. “There was obviously a lot of controversy regarding her work as she was carrying out the president’s program,” Ed Meese, a top Reagan adviser, recalled. “I’m sure that undoubtedly had an impact on her son. ” J. J. Gorsuch, 43, now a vice president of a Denver marketing technology company, said his mother’s political life had shaped the family psyche but ultimately made his brother stronger. “If anything, it probably prepared him for the experience ahead in a great way,” he said. “He knows better than most how ugly the political process might get. So in that sense it’s hopefully prepared him for the nomination process. ” His mother emerged from her 1983 resignation demoralized about Washington, which she called “too small to be a state but too large to be an asylum for the mentally deranged. ” But if her tribulations scarred him, Judge Gorsuch gave little indication while at Georgetown Preparatory School, a   Jesuit school outside Washington. His classmates  —   many the children of politicians themselves  —   knew the family connection, said Bill Hughes, son of a Democratic congressman, but left it unmentioned. As Mr. Trent said, “I can’t imagine what a difficult thing it would have been to go through that, but he never let it show. ” Judge Gorsuch focused on schoolwork and excelled at debate, competing nationally. “Even as a kid, he would be able to step back from situations and be able to make judgments about them,” said Stephen Ochs, a history teacher. “He had the ability to be curious and look at both sides without being threatened. ” His conservative identity was already forming. The school yearbook jokingly listed him as founder of a “Fascism Forever” club, which an editorial note clarified “happily jerked its knees against the increasingly ‘ ’ tendencies of the faculty. ” Mr. Trent called that “sort of his little dig getting back” at a teacher with whom he disagreed. His views apparently cost him little among his peers, who elected him student president. Classmates speculated that his poise would lead to the law and perhaps politics, said one classmate, Brian Cashman, who is now general manager of the New York Yankees. “He looked the part and acted the part. ” Judge Gorsuch arrived at Columbia in 1985 as the historically liberal university was recovering from student protests the previous spring and beginning to divest from corporations operating in South Africa. In three years on campus  —   he graduated a year early  —   he emerged as the intellectual leader of a resurgent right. It was “a happy band of dissenters,” as Brian Domitrovic, a classmate and fellow conservative, put it. His eloquence impressed many. That he was tall, clean cut and handsome only helped. He danced and drank Manhattans and martinis, Mr. Domitrovic said. He joined Phi Gamma Delta, a fraternity with a reputation for partying, and quietly attended religious services. But principally, Judge Gorsuch became known as a fierce and lucid writer in the Columbia Daily Spectator, where he published columns, and later The Federalist Paper, which he helped found. Part newspaper, part opinion journal, The Federalist Paper drew comparisons to the conservative Dartmouth Review. “There was a   system at Columbia in the ’80s: the liberals and the socialists,” said Stephen Later, who worked on the paper. “The Fed was a response to this echo chamber. ” Judge Gorsuch was out of step with campus zeitgeist. He bristled at attempts to bar military recruiting on campus, minimized the   affair and dismissed a shantytown built on campus to protest South African apartheid. The main subject that animated his writing was the political hegemony he perceived at the university. A “tyrannical atmosphere of ‘ideas,’” he called it in February 1987. “There is little or no room at Columbia for dissenting voices: one is either Right or Wrong, Moral or Immoral, Compassionate or Heartless. ” In March 1987, as students debated the fraternity system’s treatment of women and minorities, Judge Gorsuch   a piece defending   clubs. In a familiar rhetorical move, he reframed the issue as free speech. In their “heavy handed moralism,” he wrote, the system’s critics missed “the fact that Columbia is a pluralistic university, that its fraternity is equally pluralistic, with options available for everyone. ” That spring, as students boycotted Coors beer, posters on campus alleged that The Federalist Paper, which accepted the company’s advertising, had received funding from the Heritage Foundation, financed by the Coors family. Mr. Gorsuch mocked the “professional protesters” who had created the posters, and he threatened a libel suit. “He had a real regal way of writing about this stuff that made us look small,” said Tom Kamber, a leader of the liberals. “His role was really to write these screeds that would try to take the winds out of our sails. ” The battle continued at Harvard Law School, where Judge Gorsuch arrived in 1988 along with a young man from Chicago named Barack Obama. The two did not intersect much  —   Mr. Obama was six years older  —   but they mirrored each other as intellectual leaders who managed to disagree without being disagreeable. “Neil was not quite as public a person as Barack was, but at the same time, for the people who knew him, he was very well respected,” said Mr. Segal, the classmate. Young conservatives were inspired as the Soviet Union and its empire collapsed. “It was an incredibly optimistic time, and it was a time when a lot of us developed a strong belief in the power of free markets and rule of law,” said Ken Mehlman, another classmate who went on to become chairman of the Republican National Committee. Harvard was the epicenter of a debate over whether the Constitution was a living document to be interpreted in evolving times or a neutral, unchanging charter judged by its original text. “It was a pretty contentious time at Harvard Law School,” said Adam H. Charnes, a classmate. “There were conservatives who were provocateurs. He wasn’t anything like that. ” Judge Gorsuch befriended liberals, including Norm Eisen, later a White House aide and ambassador under Mr. Obama. “He stood out among the conservative group in not being loud,” Mr. Eisen said. “He managed to stay above that while making his conservative positions clear. I thought it was impressive. ” Through all of this, Judge Gorsuch made little mention of his famous mother. Indeed, one friend who stayed close after law school said he had realized the relationship only years later. Once when a fellow student said something disparaging about her on the assumption that he was not actually related, he brushed it off. “He deflected it in a very classy way that made me think it was not the first time somebody had said something like that,” Mr. Eisen said. Judge Gorsuch’s mother did not live to see the day he was nominated to the Supreme Court. But for the family, his rise represents a vindication of sorts. If he survives confirmation, he will have conquered the capital that did her in.

0 - When Walt Disney’s “Bambi” opened in 1942, critics praised its spare, haunting visual style, vastly different from anything Disney had done before. But what they did not know was that the film’s striking appearance had been created by a Chinese immigrant artist, who took as his inspiration the landscape paintings of the Song dynasty. The extent of his contribution to “Bambi,” which remains a   mark for film animation, would not be widely known for decades. Like the film’s title character, the artist, Tyrus Wong, weathered irrevocable separation from his mother  —   and, in the hope of making a life in America, incarceration, isolation and rigorous interrogation  —   all when he was still a child. In the years that followed, he endured poverty, discrimination and chronic lack of recognition, not only for his work at Disney but also for his fine art, before finding acclaim in his 90s. Mr. Wong died on Friday at 106. A Hollywood studio artist, painter, printmaker, calligrapher,   illustrator and, in later years, maker of fantastical kites, he was one of the most celebrated   artists of the 20th century. But because of the marginalization to which   were long subject, he passed much of his career unknown to the general public. Artistic recognition, when Mr. Wong did find it, was all the more noteworthy for the fact that among Chinese immigrant men of his generation, professional prospects were largely limited to menial jobs like houseboy and laundryman. Trained as a painter, Mr. Wong was a leading figure in the Modernist movement that flourished in California between the first and second World Wars. In 1932 and again in 1934, his work was included in group shows at the Art Institute of Chicago that also featured Picasso, Matisse and Paul Klee. As a staff artist for Hollywood studios from the 1930s to the 1960s, he drew storyboards and made vibrant paintings, as detailed as any architectural illustrations, that helped the director envision each scene before it was shot. Over the years his work informed the look of animated pictures for Disney and   films for Warner Brothers and other studios, among them “The Sands of Iwo Jima” (1949) “Rebel Without a Cause” (1955) and “The Wild Bunch” (1969). But of the dozens of films on which he worked, it was for “Bambi” that Mr. Wong was  —   belatedly  —   most renowned. “He was truly involved with every phase of production,” John Canemaker, an   animator and a historian of animation at New York University, said in an interview for this obituary in March. “He created an art direction that had really never been seen before in animation. ” In 2013 and 2014, Mr. Wong was the subject of “Water to Paper, Paint to Sky,” a major retrospective at the Disney Family Museum in San Francisco. From the museum’s windows, which overlook San Francisco Bay, he could contemplate Angel Island, where more than nine decades earlier, as a lone    he had sought to gain admission to a country that adamantly did not want him. Wong Gen Yeo (the name is sometimes Romanized Wong Gaing Yoo) was born on Oct. 25, 1910, in a farming village in Guangdong Province. As a young child, he already exhibited a love of drawing and was encouraged by his father. In 1920, seeking better economic prospects, Gen Yeo and his father embarked for the United States, leaving his mother and sister behind. Gen Yeo would never see his mother again. They were obliged to travel under false identities  —   a state of affairs known among Chinese immigrants as being a “paper son”  —   in the hope of circumventing the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882. Signed into law by President Chester A. Arthur, the act, which drastically curtailed the number of Chinese people allowed to enter the country, was among the earliest United States laws to impose severe restrictions on immigration. But in 1906, an unforeseen loophole opened in the form of the San Francisco earthquake and fire. Because a huge number of municipal documents, including birth and immigration records, were destroyed, many newly arrived Chinese capitalized on the loss, maintaining that they had been born in San Francisco before the fire. As United States citizens, they were entitled to bring over their relatives  —   or, in the case of Gen Yeo and his father, “paper sons” posing as relatives. Attuned to the deception, United States immigration officials put Chinese arrivals through a formidable inquisition to ensure they were who they claimed to be. The questions came like gunfire: In which direction does your village face? How many windows are in your house? Where in the house is the rice bin? How wide is your well? How deep? Are there trees in your village? Are there lakes? What shops can you name? The sponsoring relative was interrogated separately, and the answers had to match. For the new arrival, a major mistake, or a series of smaller ones, could mean deportation. To stand a chance of passing, aspirants memorized rigorous dossiers known as coaching papers. The ensuing interrogation was hard enough for adults.    Gen Yeo would undergo it alone. On Dec. 30, 1920, after a month at sea, the Wongs landed at Angel Island Immigration Station. The elder Mr. Wong was traveling as a merchant named Look Get his son as Look Tai Yow. “Angel Island is considered to be the Ellis Island of the West Coast,” Lisa See, the author of “On Gold Mountain” (1995) a nonfiction chronicle of her   family, said in an interview in 2016. However, she continued: “The goal was really very different than Ellis Island, which was supposed to be so welcoming. Angel Island opened very specifically to keep the Chinese out. ” Because Mr. Wong’s father had previously lived in the United States as Look Get, he was able to clear Immigration quickly. But as a new arrival, Gen Yeo was detained on the island for nearly a month, the only child among the immigrants being held there. “I was scared half to death I just cried,” Mr. Wong recalled in “Tyrus,” an   documentary directed by Pamela Tom, which premiered in 2015. “Every day is just miserable  —   miserable. I hated that place. ” On Jan. 27, 1921, in the presence of an interpreter and a stenographer, young Gen Yeo, posing as Look Tai Yow, was interrogated by three inspectors. His father had already been questioned. Gen Yeo was well prepared and answered without error. In Sacramento, where he joined his father, a schoolteacher Americanized “Tai Yow” to “Tyrus,” and he was known as Tyrus Wong ever after. Soon afterward, father and son were separated once more, when the elder Mr. Wong moved to Los Angeles to seek work. For reasons that have been lost to time, he could not take his son. Tyrus lived on his own in a Sacramento boardinghouse while attending elementary school. Two years later  —   possibly more  —   Tyrus traveled to Los Angeles to join his father, who had found work in a gambling den. They lived in a   boardinghouse sandwiched between a butcher shop and a brothel. After school, Tyrus worked as a houseboy for two Pasadena families, earning 50 cents a day. His first art teacher was his father, who trained him nightly in calligraphy by having him dip a brush in water and trace ghostly characters on newspaper: They could not afford ink or drawing paper. When Tyrus was in junior high, a teacher, noting his drawing talent, arranged a summer scholarship to the Otis Art Institute in Los Angeles. By his own account an indifferent student in public school, Tyrus found his calling at the institute, now the Otis College of Art and Design. When his scholarship ended he declined to return to junior high. His father scraped together the $90 tuition  —   a small fortune  —   to let him stay on as Otis’s youngest student. He studied there for at least five years, simultaneously working as the school janitor, before graduating in the 1930s. Not long afterward his father died, leaving young Mr. Wong entirely on his own. From 1936 to 1938, Mr. Wong was an artist for the Works Progress Administration, creating paintings for libraries and other public spaces. With friends, including the   artist Benji Okubo, he founded the Oriental Artists’ Group of Los Angeles, which organized exhibitions of members’ work  —   an   level of exposure for Asian artists at the time. Mr. Wong, newly married and needing steady work, joined Disney in 1938 as an “” creating the thousands of intermediate drawings that bring animated sequences to life. Asians were then a novelty at Hollywood studios, and Mr. Wong was made keenly aware of the fact, first at Disney and later at Warner Brothers. One   flung a racial epithet at him. Another assumed on sight that he worked in the company cafeteria. Then there was the affront of the  ’s job itself: Painstaking, repetitive and for Mr. Wong quickly   it is the   work of animation  —   “a terrible use of his talents as a landscape artist and a painter,” Mr. Canemaker said. A reprieve came in the late 1930s, when Mr. Wong learned that Disney was adapting “Bambi, a Life in the Woods,” the 1923 novel by the Austrian writer Felix Salten about a fawn whose mother is killed by a hunter. In trying to animate the book, Disney had reached an impasse. The studio had enjoyed great success in 1937 with its animated film “Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs,” a baroque production in which every detail of the backgrounds  —   every petal on every flower, every leaf on every tree  —   was meticulously represented. In an attempt to use a similar style for “Bambi,” it found that the ornate backgrounds camouflaged the deer and other forest creatures on which the narrative centered. Mr. Wong spied his chance. “I said, ‘Gee, this is all outdoor scenery,’” he recalled in a video interview years afterward, adding: “I said, ‘Gee, I’m a landscape painter! ’” Invoking the exquisite landscape paintings of the Song dynasty (A. D. 960 —  1279) he rendered in watercolors and pastels a series of nature scenes that were moody, lyrical and atmospheric  —   at once lush and spare  —   with backgrounds subtly suggested by a stroke or two of the brush. “Walt Disney went crazy over them,” said Mr. Canemaker, who wrote about Mr. Wong in his book “Before the Animation Begins: The Art and Lives of Disney Inspirational Sketch Artists” (1996). “He said, ‘I love this indefinite quality, the mysterious quality of the forest. ’” Mr. Wong was unofficially promoted to the rank of inspirational sketch artist. “But he was more than that,” Mr. Canemaker explained. “He was the designer he was the person they went to when they had questions about the color, about how to lay something out. He even influenced the music and the special effects: Just by the look of the drawings, he inspired people. ” Mr. Wong spent two years painting the illustrations that would inform every aspect of “Bambi. ” Throughout the finished film  —   lent a brooding quality by its stark landscapes misty, desaturated palette and figures often seen in silhouette  —   his influence is unmistakable. But in 1941, in the wake of a bitter employees’ strike that year, Disney fired Mr. Wong. Though he had chosen not to strike  —   he felt the studio had been good to him, Mr. Canemaker said  —   he was let go amid the lingering climate of   resentments. On “Bambi,” Mr. Wong’s name appears, quite far down in the credits, as a mere “background” artist. Mr. Wong joined Warner Brothers in 1942, working there  —   and lent out on occasion to other studios  —   until his retirement in 1968. The indignities he endured were not confined to the studios. Trying to buy a house, he and his wife, the former Ruth Kim, were told that each property they inquired about had just been sold. “Then in a month you’d go back there and the sign was still there,” Mr. Wong recalled in “Tyrus. ” After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, Mr. Wong, like many   took to wearing a lapel button proclaiming his heritage, lest an angry American beat him up on the street. The war permanently dispersed the fledgling Oriental Artists’ Group. Mr. Wong’s friend Mr. Okubo was sent, with tens of thousands of other   to an internment camp. “If World War II hadn’t happened when it did, I think these artists, even the   artists, would have more of a name than they do today,” Ms. See said. “And that’s because this little movement that had just barely started was split apart by the war. ” Mr. Wong, who became a United States citizen in 1946, also designed Christmas cards for Hallmark and painted elegant   designs on dinnerware, now sought after by collectors. A longtime resident of Sunland, Calif. he became, in retirement, a renowned kitemaker, designing, building and hand coloring astonishing, airworthy creations  —   butterflies, swallows, whole flocks of owls, centipedes more than 100 feet long  —   that streaked the Southern California sky like paint on blue canvas. During the last 15 years of Ruth Wong’s life, when she was ill with dementia, Mr. Wong forsook his work to care for her. After her death in 1995, he slowly began making art again. In 2001, in formal recognition of his influence on “Bambi,” Mr. Wong was named a Disney Legend. The honor  —   whose previous recipients include Fred MacMurray, Julie Andrews and Annette Funicello  —   is bestowed by the Walt Disney Company for outstanding contributions. In 2003, a retrospective of his work, curated in part by Ms. See, was the inaugural exhibition at the Chinese American Museum in Los Angeles. The Disney Family Museum’s retrospective, “Water to Paper, Paint to Sky,” traveled in 2015 to the Museum of Chinese in America, in Lower Manhattan. Mr. Wong’s death, at his home in Sunland, was confirmed by the filmmaker Ms. Tom. His survivors include three daughters, Kay Fong,   Wong and Kim Wong and two grandchildren. When his daughters were small, Mr. Wong encouraged them to make art, as his father had encouraged him. Yet he would not let them have coloring books. The reason was simple: He did not want his children constrained, he said, by lines laid down by others.

0 - One night six years ago, on a quiet side street in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, I came across a photo album that had been put out with the trash. I lived around the corner, and I was walking home when I saw it sitting beneath a streetlamp on Lincoln Place. It looked handmade, with a wooden cover bound with a shoelace. But it had been tied up with twine, like a bunch of old newspapers, and left atop a pile of recycling. After hesitating a moment, I picked it up and took it home. The pages were fragile, and they cracked when I turned them, as if the album hadn’t been opened in a long time, but the photos were perfectly preserved. They seemed to chronicle the life of a black couple at midcentury: a beautiful woman with a big smile and a man who looked serious, or was maybe just   and had served in World War II. As I turned the pages, the scenery changed from country picnics to city streets and crowded dance halls in what appeared to be Harlem, and the couple went from youth to middle age. Looking at the album, I was struck by how joyful the photos were  —   and by the fact that as fabled as this era was, I had never seen a black family’s own account of that time. I wondered who these neighbors were, and who had thrown the album out. For decades, this part of Crown Heights had been mostly black. When I arrived in the neighborhood, several years before, I was one of the few nonblack residents on the block. The neighborhood was changing, though newcomers were arriving and longtime residents were moving out. I went back to Lincoln Place, hoping to find the album’s owner it had surely been thrown out by mistake. Lincoln Place was the very image of old Brooklyn promoted by real estate agents. On other blocks, the houses were carved up or crumbling. Or they had been torn down and replaced by big buildings with spotlights and   signs. But on Lincoln Place, the stately rowhouses were still intact and well loved. The block was preserved in amber. I knocked on doors and left my number, but I never heard from anyone. So I put the album on my bookshelf. A few years later, my landlords got an offer they couldn’t refuse, and my short time in Crown Heights was up. I stumbled upon the album while packing and pulled it off the shelf. Now I really had to reckon with it. Gentrification was transforming the neighborhood  —   soon there might be no one left who recognized the world in these pictures. And the album was literally falling apart in my hands. If I was ever going to try to get to the bottom of it, this was the time. I decided to uncover its story. I thought it would be simple. But chasing the album would become something of a journey, one that would take me far from   Brooklyn to the Jim Crow South, from a remote island in the Pacific to the packed tenements of Harlem, before returning me to Lincoln Place at another moment of great change. Last spring, I began the search. The photos were arranged on black   pages with little mounting corners and Scotch tape that had turned yellow with age. There were 167 pictures, and they covered both sides of the pages, as if to save space. But the photos stopped about halfway through the album. The rest of it was blank. I looked behind every photo, but there were only a few clues, handwritten notes like “From your old pal Duke,” “Myself and Sylvia” or “Love to Etta Mae, From Dorothy. ” The name Etta Mae was written on three or four photos, and I began to suspect she was the woman who appeared throughout the album. She had a full figure and elegant hands. She smoked. But I always spotted her by her smile. She was often with the same man. They were embracing, or they were in separate photos on the same page. I guessed that he was her husband on one photo, someone had written, “To my best friend’s hubby. ” Carrying photocopies of a few pictures, I went back to Crown Heights. I had been gone less than two years, but there were all sorts of changes. On Nostrand Avenue, a West Indian market that had carried buckets of salt cod had closed. Where once the only coffee had come in yellow cans of Bustelo, cafes served locally roasted espresso. There was a retro cocktail bar. On Lincoln Place, a   sign hung outside one house, and another was under renovation. There was a Pilates studio. There were more young families now, and when I asked them about the album as they swept the sidewalk or sat on their stoops, they apologized: They were new to the block and couldn’t help. One evening, I was close to giving up when a young man in a garden apartment told me to talk to Jimmy, the oldest guy on the block. He pointed to a red house a few doors down. An old man answered the door. Yes, he said, he was Jimmy  —   James Burton. I showed him the photocopied pictures, and he squinted. “That’s Mrs. Taylor,” he said. “Etta Mae. ” The man in the pictures was her husband, Isaiah Taylor. Everyone called him Ike, Mr. Burton said. The Taylors had lived on Lincoln Place forever. He pointed next door, at a white house with classical molding. When I returned to Lincoln Place a few days later with the whole album, Mr. Burton and his wife, Lenore, were doing a puzzle at a card table. “You say you just found this album on the street?” she asked, laughing. “I wouldn’t touch it. I’m amazed you would touch it. ” “Would you pick it up?” she asked her husband. “Maybe,” he said. They were in their late 80s. Ms. Burton had worked as a bookkeeper, and Mr. Burton had been a chauffeur and a shipping clerk. They had lived on Lincoln Place since the early 1950s, and raised their two daughters there. The Taylors had been their neighbors and close friends, almost like family. “In those days, we knew most everybody, and then they started disappearing and dying and moving away,” Mr. Burton said. “Now I’m lucky if I know 10 people. ” We sat on the couch and opened the album. Pages had torn loose from the binding, and as we passed them between us, black flakes fluttered to the floor. “No, no,” Mr. Burton said, peering at the faces to see if he recognized anyone. “Etta and Ike. That’s all I know is them two. ” Halfway through, we came to a page crowded with small pictures. Mr. Burton paused. “That looks like me,” he said, his voice a little louder. “Your mother, Uncle Fernando  —   that’s my wedding. ” I was hooked. Now that I had names, I enlisted a researcher at The New York Times, Susan C. Beachy, and she pulled documents for Etta Mae Taylor: census records birth, death and marriage certificates old phone books newspaper clippings. Etta Mae didn’t have children. Her siblings had all died. But she had relatives scattered across the country. The Burtons remembered a niece from North Carolina, and the researcher found someone in Raleigh named Joann Barnes. She was now in her 70s. For months, the only other thing I knew about her was that she didn’t pick up her phone. I didn’t blame her. “Hello,” I would say when I left voice mail messages, “I’m calling about a photo album that may have belonged to your family. ” Even as I said it, I knew it sounded like a scam. I tried her relatives, calling, sending emails and friendly Facebook messages, but always with the same result: silence. The documents, at least, gave me the beginnings of Etta Mae’s story. Etta Mae Barnes was born on July 28, 1918, in Wilson, N. C. which once called itself the world’s greatest   tobacco market. When Ms. Taylor was young, it was a boomtown. Thousands of   families had migrated to Wilson from the countryside to pick tobacco on farms and hang it in big warehouses downtown. The first pages in the album seemed to be of Wilson several photos had stamps from photographers’ studios there. There were portraits of women in flouncy dresses, babies, a boy with a dog, a group in straw hats in a field. In two portraits placed side by side, a   couple posed by a flowering bush, in front of a clapboard house. I wondered if they were Etta Mae’s parents. Etta Mae’s mother, Anna Bell Green Barnes, was born in Virginia and worked as a hanger at a tobacco company, the documents revealed. Her father, James Frank Barnes, was a grocery store clerk. His family went back generations in Wilson County. Etta Mae was one of six. When she was still a child, her oldest brother, Charles, boarded the train that passed through Wilson and became part of what we now call the Great Migration, the exodus of millions of black Southerners from the Jim Crow South. Judging from the album, many of Etta Mae’s relatives had gone north I could tell them apart from their country kin by their suits and furs. Etta Mae left school after seventh grade and went to work as a housekeeper in a private home, according to the 1940 census. That year, 10 other people were living at the Barneses’ including an aunt an adopted daughter Etta Mae’s sister Mildred Mildred’s husband, Jack Artis and their baby, Charles. In 1940, Etta Mae left her crowded home. But she didn’t go north just yet. She went to Suffolk, Va. where, according to her marriage license, she wed Isaiah Taylor on the day after her 22nd birthday. Ike Taylor was three years younger than Etta Mae, and when they married, he had recently graduated from high school and was working as a deliveryman. His father was a cook. His mother worked at a peanut processing plant. Suffolk, like Wilson, was segregated, unofficially divided by the railroad tracks. On one side, a sizable black community had grown, drawn by jobs in the factories of peanut producers like Planters. The Taylors’ wedding announcement in a local paper said, “The couple will reside here. ” But in 1941, the United States entered World War II, and farm work had grown scarce amid an agriculture crisis. Hundreds of thousands of black Southerners rushed to enlist, and Ike was one of them. There were about a dozen photographs from the war in the album, loose snapshots tucked in the back. They showed black soldiers amid spindly trees and what looked like Japanese shrines. Ike was an army truck commander in the 510th Port Battalion and rose to the rank of master sergeant, according to his military records. His unit was stationed on Tinian, an island in the Pacific that the United States captured from the Japanese, where the armed forces built a huge air base. (It was from Tinian that the Enola Gay took off for Hiroshima.) Today, most of the men in Ike’s unit would be approaching 100, if they were alive at all, and I had given up on getting a firsthand account, when I found a videotaped interview with a member of the 510th in the Library of Congress. James W. Taylor (no relation to Ike) died in 2014. In the video, he described their time in the army. The armed forces were still segregated, and there were almost no black combat units until troops thinned at the end of the war black soldiers were instead relegated to labor and service units. Their battalion unloaded ammunition from ships and provided transport. On Tinian, they lived apart from the white soldiers. They slept in tents in a separate camp, ate separately and drank from water tanks that they filled, separately, from a mountain spring. These men may have enlisted in the army to escape Jim Crow, but instead they found themselves on a tropical island in the Pacific that had become a replica of the segregated South. This was where records trailed off. To go any further, I needed a guide. One night in the fall, I found one. I got a Facebook message from someone in Wilson named Craig Barnes Jr. whom I had written to months before. “Sorry, I’m just seeing this now,” he said. “Do you still have that photo?” I replied immediately with a smiley face. “I have the entire album!” Over the phone, Mr. Barnes, 25, said that he was related to Etta Mae, but that he didn’t know much about her the person to talk to was his grandmother, Joann Barnes  —   the woman in Raleigh who hadn’t taken my calls. He promised to set up a conversation, but weeks went by. When we finally spoke, he had bad news: She wasn’t answering the phone. But that was all I had. So a week later, I boarded a flight for Raleigh, the album in my bag. I met up with a photographer and we drove to the last listed address for Ms. Barnes: a retirement complex in a   apartment building surrounded by trees. I was unsure if she even lived there, much less how she would feel about my visit, and as we approached, I felt nervous for the first time. I had come all this way, and though I thought the album was important, maybe I was just intruding. I pressed the buzzer and identified myself over the intercom as a reporter from New York. After a long moment, a woman’s voice crackled through the speaker. “All right,” she said. “I’ll buzz you in, dear. ” As we walked down the hall toward her apartment, Ms. Barnes stepped out from her door, as if she planned to give us only a minute. She had short gray hair and wore a   blouse. “Are you a relative of Etta Mae Taylor?” I asked. “Yes, I was her niece,” she said. I explained, quickly, how I had met the Burtons, that they had told me Etta Mae’s name and that I should look for her niece. “O. K.,” she said. “And, well,” I said, “basically, I found this on the street. ” I held out the album. She gave a surprised laugh. I laughed too, with relief. “You know, it kind of makes you leery,” Ms. Barnes said. She had gotten my messages, and her grandson’s, but she was skeptical because she had never seen her aunt’s photo album. She invited us in. Her apartment was small and neat. She had been cleaning, and after she washed her hands, we sat down. She was from Wilson, she said, but she left when she was young and spent nearly 30 years in New York, where she was a visiting nurse. She opened the album. “Oh, my goodness,” she said. “These are from way back. ” She spotted her grandparents  —   Etta Mae’s parents  —   in front of the clapboard house in Wilson where she, too, had grown up. There, in the yard, they played horseshoes and caught pigeons. She named her aunts and uncles and cousins. “And that’s me,” she said, touching a photo of a little girl. “I always liked this picture. I believe my father made this skirt. He used to make clothes for me when I was small. And I always had those big bows. ” She shook her head and smiled. “Little knock knees,” she said. Wilson was about an hour’s drive east. The downtown was deserted, the brick warehouses the only remnant of the tobacco era. Across the tracks, the house where Etta Mae grew up had been torn down. In the empty lot where it once stood, there was no trace of the family that had become so real to me. A pickup was parked in the overgrown grass. Most of Etta Mae’s family had left Wilson and scattered, but Craig Barnes Jr. was still there. We met up at an Applebee’s off the highway. I thanked him for writing to me and handed him the album. As he turned the pages, I said I had never seen a black family’s photos from this era. He said he hadn’t either. “The lifestyle they’re living looks amazing,” he said. In Etta Mae’s day, the magic of Harlem reached the South through newspapers, relatives’ letters and the radio, and in the 1940s, another wave of Southern migrants moved to New York, drawn by Cab Calloway and Duke Ellington as much as by the promise of factory jobs. “New York was the place to be,” Ms. Barnes said. While Ike was in the Pacific, Etta Mae joined her sister Mildred and her husband, along with her brother Charles, in Harlem, and the sisters found jobs pressing drapes at a factory in the garment district. “They were pressers,” Ms. Barnes said. “That was kind of the going job at the time. ” When the war was over, Ike and Etta Mae were reunited in New York. On weekends, they would go dancing  —   at small clubs and at the blocklong Savoy Ballroom on Lenox Avenue, where thousands of couples did the jitterbug. From the time she was little, Ms. Barnes would take the train every year to visit the Taylors. “I was a Southern girl I used to go every summer with my grandmother,” she said. “When I would see them dressed up, it was exciting. Like these were some movie stars or something. ” Of her two aunts, Ms. Barnes said, Etta Mae was the serious one. “Mae thought she was the boss. She always thought she was smarter than everybody else. She was always saying, ‘Sister, you shouldn’t do that Sister, you should. ’” But she loved to dance, Ms. Barnes said. “And she could sing, too. ” The photos speak to the glamour of life in Harlem, but they barely hint at its struggles. Housing discrimination largely confined black people to Harlem, and in the 1940s, as more Southern migrants surged into the city, its blocks became some of the most densely populated in the world. Landlords charged high rents and let their buildings fall into ruin. They knew their tenants had nowhere else to go. After riots broke out in 1943, Langston Hughes wrote of Harlemites’ poverty and frustration: “Some of them don’t try anymore.   I reckon. ” Etta Mae and her sister lived in a packed tenement on West 116th Street. Their brother Charles, who in the album looks dashing in a dark suit with a pocket square, worked as a deliveryman for a florist, and shared his apartment on 131st Street with his wife and seven lodgers from the South. In the middle of the album was a series of oversize portraits of couples gathered around   tables in night clubs. I couldn’t figure out where they were taken until a clue cropped up in an old newspaper: Ike was listed among the members of the Eight Chaps Social Club, a men’s club composed of Suffolkians that was hosting a dance in Harlem. Seven of the Chaps were dead now, but the eighth picked up the phone. “Isaiah Taylor?” Walter Howell, 95, said. Of course he remembered him. “Good buddy of mine. ” He told me the photos were, indeed, from the club’s dances. They look glamorous, but all of the Chaps, Mr. Howell said, had   jobs. He had worked in a   plant preparing minks and sables. Then he answered a question that hadn’t occurred to me, which was why the Taylors had such a dazzling record of their social life. The reason was that one member of the club, Jesse Williams, was a professional photographer. Craig Steven Wilder, a historian at M. I. T. told me that for Southern migrants far from home, men’s clubs like the Eight Chaps “become their new kinship networks. ” “That informal network is how you access news about where you can move,” Professor Wilder said, “where black people are moving and welcome. ” In 1950, the population of Central Harlem reached its peak, and   began to inch their way into other boroughs. The Eight Chaps scattered. Etta Mae and Ike, of course, went to Brooklyn. Crown Heights was predominantly white at the time. And when Etta Mae and Ike moved to Lincoln Place around 1950, renting a room from a black hairdresser named Lucille Stewart, they became some of the first black residents on the block. The Burtons, the neighbors whose wedding photos were in the album, came soon after. “We were about the second blacks on the block,” Lenore Burton said. Ms. Burton’s parents, Clara and Cannon Harper, moved into the white house with the classical molding, with their daughter Jackie. After they got married, the Burtons bought the red house next door. Etta Mae and Ike soon moved into the third floor of the Harpers’ white house, and the two households became like one. Etta Mae’s album captures their communal life: They shared meals, gave each other haircuts, gathered in the kitchen in their bathrobes. Ms. Burton’s sister, Jackie Jones, still lives in the white house that she grew up in and eventually inherited from her parents. On one of my visits to the Burtons’ she appeared, magically, in their living room: Back in the 1950s, they had installed a door between their homes. “All the families were intertwined more or less, though they weren’t blood relations,” Ms. Jones, 89, said. The picture the Burtons painted of the 1950s was a happy one. And it took me a moment to step back and see the obvious: During this time, as black people arrived on Lincoln Place, white families were leaving. Isabel Wilkerson, the author of “The Warmth of Other Suns: The Epic Story of America’s Great Migration,” said the timing was not a coincidence. “Fear led many white residents to flee,” she said. “Neighborhoods began to open up because white people were so fearful that they would sell at a loss. ” It was a sign of what was coming. In the next decades, hundreds of thousands of white families would leave the city, and black families would move into their homes, a phenomenon that came to be known as white flight. In 1950, the Taylors’ census tract was 95 percent white. By 1970, it was 87 percent black. White flight is often associated with the poverty and crime that plagued New York City in the later decades of the 20th century, and conjures images of muggings, abandoned buildings and urban blight. But these photos too were images of the   era: People posing beside a 1950s television console, a man at a piano, a sunny picnic. In 1956, the new homeowners formed the Lincoln Civic Block Association, which still exists. “There was a Pokeno circle, a poker circle,” Mr. Burton said. “You’d go from house to house. Nobody had a lock on the door. Our house was never locked. You’d look up, and there’d be cousin   . ” The Burtons pointed out a few houses on Lincoln Place where   still lived. A neighbor, Marilyn LeGall, 72, grew up visiting her aunt and uncle on Lincoln Place. “You played stickball, you jumped rope,” she said. “Everyone looked after the other. ” That was life on Lincoln Place, said Arthur Bates Jr. 56, who grew up on the block. “It was a real neighborhood, and a black experience no one talks about, because it wasn’t filled with drugs and it wasn’t filled with poverty,” Mr. Bates said. “It was public schools, it was playing ball, it was playing music. ” Now, he added, everyone was discovering brownstone Brooklyn. “It’s been sitting here, like so many aspects of our lives. People say, ‘It’s dripping with original details.’ Who do you think maintained it? Where were you?” Etta Mae and Ike settled down on Lincoln Place after a decade of war and uncertainty and living in cramped quarters in Harlem. Etta Mae kept working in the garment district. She went bargain hunting on Flatbush Avenue for outfits and nice furniture for their apartment. She joined a book club. Ike got dogs  —   and cars. “A blue Chevy,” Mr. Burton recalled. On the weekends, they would go to their dances, and Mildred came over. They drank cocktails and listened to records. “They were   folks,” Ms. Jones said. “You could come and sit and drink and smoke and laugh. They loved to laugh. ” They traveled, driving south to see one of Ike’s sisters in Washington, and to their hometowns. In the 1960s, they went on cruises. New York gave them a good life. And if it was lived in the shadow of white flight, it was a life they never could have had in the South. Ike’s niece, Brenda Oliver, 67, remembered her aunt arriving in Virginia wearing pretty clothes, smelling good. Ms. Oliver’s mother was a maid. “My mom lived in a house with a coal stove. She was so impressed that her siblings had gotten out of the South and made a life for themselves. ” In their later years, Ike and Etta Mae look content. In one photo, they stand beside each other, she in a dress, he in a suit. She is giving him a knowing little smile. His arm is around her shoulder. It is the last photo of the two of them together. On Aug. 5, 1971, Ike died of cancer. He was 50. After he died, Etta Mae stopped keeping the album. That was why half of the pages were blank. Etta Mae stayed on Lincoln Place. She took care of children for working couples, recalled the Burtons’ daughter, Carol Burton, 58. Etta Mae got books in the mail, never putting them on the shelf until they were read. She went to church every Sunday, at Berean Baptist nearby. She took in relatives once or twice, for brief spells, but otherwise lived alone. I found former residents of Lincoln Place. They remembered Etta Mae, but not as the young woman in the album. “She was always an old lady,” Sherrie Tanner Hammonds, 47, said. She grew up on the block with her grandmother, Ms. Stewart, the hairdresser, and now lives in Rochester. “She always had a small dog. She had a little set schedule. She would walk morning and night. ” “Rain or shine,” said Constance P. Jermin, 83, who left Lincoln Place for Georgia in 2002. “She was very deliberate and devoted. And she always greeted everyone. Always with a big smile. ” For a few years, Etta Mae and I shared the block. Our bedroom windows looked out on the same backyards, and every day, she must have walked past my house, though I can’t recall if I ever actually saw her. When she could no longer get around, Ms. Jones, her landlady, took care of her. “She was feisty,” said Ms. Jones, who said she never raised her rent from $200. “She was good until the end. ” The end was swift. In 2010, Etta Mae fell and went to the hospital, and from there, to a nursing home in East New York, Brooklyn. She died there, five long miles from Lincoln Place, on June 4, 2011. She was 92. She is buried next to her husband at Long Island National Cemetery, a veterans’ graveyard in Farmingdale, N. Y. They share a single headstone, their names on either side. Etta Mae’s funeral program ends, “Etta lived a full life. ” It was all in the album: the Great Migration, Harlem at its most chaotic and crowded, the transformation of Brooklyn. For her neighbors on Lincoln Place, Etta Mae’s album brought back happy memories of their first years on the block, but it did not stop the clock from ticking. In October, Lenore Burton died. Her widower, James Burton, plans to stay in their home on Lincoln Place. For Etta Mae’s family, the album helped fill the void left by relatives who moved to the North. They let me hold onto the album until the publication of this article. I had one last question: How did the album end up on the curb? After her aunt died, Joann Barnes came from Raleigh to arrange the funeral in Brooklyn. She hadn’t been to Lincoln Place in years and was surprised by how little her aunt’s home had changed. She had moved into the back rooms and left the rest untouched. Everything was from the 1950s  —   the kitchen sink and cabinets, the furniture in the living room, which was covered in plastic. In Ike’s old office, there was a record player, hundreds of records, and a shelf with glasses and little stirrers, the remnants of his bar. The closets were stuffed with linens and old clothes. When she went to dry her hands after washing them in the bathroom, the hand towel was so old it split in two. She was tired from the funeral, and overwhelmed. She just wanted to get home. She packed up some wedding dishes for her sister, a few pots and pans. For herself, she took some change from a drawer. “A silver dollar, some old coins,” she said. “That’s just me. I have my memory of her and our trips and what we did together. I’m not a keeper. ” As she got ready to go, Ms. Jones came in. “She asked me if I was coming back,” Ms. Barnes said, “and I said no. ‘Open the doors and let the neighbors come and take what they want. Just open it up. ’” In the weeks afterward, Ms. Jones worked her way through the apartment. She bagged up the clothes. She pulled the records off the shelf. She boxed up Etta Mae’s books. When she found the album, she tied it up with twine. And one evening, before the trucks came to pick up the recycling, she carried it outside with a few boxes and left it on the curb. A few minutes, or a few hours, passed. Then, just as Etta Mae had walked past my house so many times before, I walked by hers, picked up her album and carried it home.

0 - WASHINGTON  —   President Obama’s advisers wrestled with an intractable problem in the spring and summer of 2015: How could they stabilize Afghanistan while preserving Mr. Obama’s longtime goal of pulling out the last American troops before he left office? As it happened, the president solved the problem for them. In early August of that year, when Mr. Obama convened a meeting of the National Security Council, he looked around the table and acknowledged a stark new reality. “The fever in this room has finally broken,” the president told the group, according to a person in the meeting. “We’re no longer in   mode. ” What Mr. Obama meant was that no one in the Situation Room that day, himself included, thought that the United States  —   after 14 years of war, billions of dollars spent and more than 2, 000 American lives lost  —   would ever transform Afghanistan into a semblance of a democracy able to defend itself. At the same time, he added, “the counterterrorism challenges are real. ” As bleak as Afghanistan’s prospects were, the United States could not afford to walk away and allow the country to become a seedbed for extremists again. A few weeks later, the president halted the withdrawal and announced that he would leave thousands of American troops in the country indefinitely. It was a crucial turning point in the evolution of Barack Obama. The antiwar candidate of 2008 who had pledged to turn around Afghanistan  —   the “good war” to George W. Bush’s “bad war” in Iraq  —   had conceded that the longest military operation in American history would not end on his watch. The optimistic president who once thought Afghanistan was winnable had, through bitter experience, become the commander in chief of a forever war. He remains defensive about the lessons of that journey. “We shouldn’t assume that every time a country has problems that it reflects a failure of American policy,” the president said in an interview in September. Now, as Mr. Obama prepares to turn the war over to Donald J. Trump, a leader even more skeptical than he is about the value of American engagement in foreign conflicts, Afghanistan captures the disillusionment of a man who believed, as he put it in his 2009 Nobel Peace Prize acceptance speech, “that war is sometimes necessary, and war at some level is an expression of human folly. ” More than any other conflict, Afghanistan shaped Mr. Obama’s thinking on the basic questions of war, peace and the use of military power. It is where he discovered his affinity for drones, sharpened his belief in the limits of American intervention, battled his generals and hardened his disdain for unreliable foreign leaders. It reaffirmed his suspicions about sending American troops into foreign conflicts and made him reluctant to use more force in Iraq, Syria, Libya and other war zones. It also chastened him about his own hopes. “When it comes to helping these societies stabilize and create a more secure environment and a better life for their people, we have to understand,” he said in the interview, “that this is a long slog. ” Mr. Obama was a state senator from Illinois in October 2002 when he famously condemned Iraq as a “dumb war. ” But in the same speech he also said, “I don’t oppose all wars. ” He was referring to Afghanistan, which he viewed as a just war to hunt down the perpetrators of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. “I would willingly take up arms myself to prevent such tragedy from happening again,” he told the crowd that day in Chicago’s Federal Plaza. By July 2008, as the Democratic nominee for president, Mr. Obama had embraced Afghanistan as a priority over Iraq  —   the “good war,” in a phrase that he never actually used himself but that became so associated with his approach it was sometimes wrongly attributed to him. Mr. Obama praised the Bush administration’s troop surge in Iraq that year not because he believed that the United States could transform Iraqi society, but because he thought that reducing the violence there would allow the nation to turn its attention to Afghanistan. “This is a war that we have to win,” he declared. He promised to send at least two more combat brigades, or roughly 10, 000 soldiers, to Afghanistan. The United States was hardly on course for victory. Although there were already close to 50, 000 American troops in Afghanistan as Mr. Obama campaigned that summer, the Taliban were gaining momentum. In a bloody debacle, nine American soldiers were killed in what became known as the Battle of Wanat when the Taliban brazenly overran a remote Army outpost in the far eastern province of Nuristan. Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, echoed Mr. Obama in calling the situation in the country “precarious and urgent. ” More than 100 Americans would die in Afghanistan by the end of 2008, a larger number than in any other prior year. When Mr. Obama took office in January 2009, he ordered a quick policy review on Afghanistan by a former intelligence analyst, Bruce Riedel. But even before it was completed, he accepted a Pentagon recommendation to send 17, 000 additional troops to Afghanistan, bringing the total to nearly 70, 000 American troops on the ground. By the fall of 2009, with the Taliban showing increased strength, Mr. Obama’s military commanders, backed by the elders on his war council, including Hillary Clinton, then his secretary of state, were pressing him to go much farther. They urged on him an ambitious counterinsurgency strategy that had helped turn around the war in Iraq  —   a     expensive doctrine of trying to win over the locals by building roads, bridges, schools and a   government. The strategy, known by its acronym COIN, would require as many as 40, 000 additional American men and women in uniform in Afghanistan, his advisers told him. “There was still the afterglow of the surge in Iraq, and the counterinsurgency narrative that had made the military the savior of the Iraq war,” said Vali R. Nasr, a former State Department adviser on Afghanistan and Pakistan. “I don’t believe Obama was in a position to pick a debate with the military on Afghanistan, and to assert what would be his worldview. ” “In many ways, I think, he deferred,” said Mr. Nasr, now the dean of the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies. Although Mr. Obama agreed after months of internal debate to send 30, 000 additional troops to Afghanistan, he placed a strict timetable on the mission, saying they would have to be withdrawn again, starting in July 2011. His aides later said he felt hijacked by a military that had presented him with a narrow band of options rather than a real choice. Even some former military commanders agreed, saying that the troop deployments were framed in a way that made choosing a smaller number  —   20, 000, for example  —   look like a path to certain defeat. “President Obama was asking the military for broad options,” said Karl W. Eikenberry, a retired general who served as the commander in Afghanistan from 2005 to 2007 and was later Mr. Obama’s ambassador to Kabul. But, he said, the military gave Mr. Obama only “variations” on “the more robust counterinsurgency model. ” Mr. Eikenberry, who wrote a politically explosive but prescient cable in late 2009 raising doubts about the wisdom of the surge, diagnosed a deeper problem with the policy. Was it simply to prevent Afghanistan from being a safe haven for Al Qaeda? Or was it to turn Afghanistan into another Denmark? “When he came in, everyone knew we were going to do more,” Mr. Eikenberry said. “But what we were trying to achieve was difficult to define. ” Given Mr. Obama’s innate wariness of   it didn’t take long for him to grow disenchanted with the Denmark option. A few months into the surge, in the spring of 2010, David H. Petraeus, the commander of the Pentagon’s Central Command and an architect of the strategy, was briefing him on the state of the counterinsurgency campaign. Drawing on anthropology theory from the University of Chicago, General Petraeus explained to his commander in chief how neighborhoods in Kandahar related to one another. Mr. Obama listened for a while, then cut him off. “We can’t worry about how neighborhoods relate to each other in Kandahar,” he curtly told General Petraeus, according to people in the room. “Obama believes the military can do enormous things,” said Benjamin J. Rhodes, the deputy national security adviser. “It can win wars and stabilize conflicts. But a military can’t create a political culture or build a society. ” By the end of his first term, Mr. Obama had evolved to the point that he fully embraced the concept “Afghan good enough. ” The phrase, which had been kicked around the White House since 2010, referred to the shift away from   to a policy that was content with taking out the terrorists, preventing the Taliban from overrunning the country and putting a premium on getting the troops out. By that new standard, things had improved in Afghanistan. By August 2010, 100, 000 American troops were on the ground in Afghanistan and were pushing back the Taliban in some critical areas. Despite uneven progress in the military campaign, Ryan Crocker, a diplomat who had reopened the American Embassy in Kabul in 2002 and served there again as ambassador in 2011, recalled thinking, “Wow, this place looks great!” The Navy SEAL raid that killed Osama bin Laden in Pakistan in May 2011 added to Mr. Obama’s conviction that he was on the way to closing the books on the war. At midnight on May 1, 2012, Air Force One rolled out from behind a hangar at Joint Base Andrews to pick up the president for a secret trip to Afghanistan. He was going to sign a strategic partnership agreement with President Hamid Karzai that set the terms for relations after 2014, when the United States was scheduled to withdraw its combat troops and turn over Afghanistan’s security to the Afghans. Aides to Mr. Obama had advised him not to go for security reasons, but he saw it as an important milestone. The agreement promised an “enduring partnership” between the United States and Afghanistan, with pledges of American help in developing the Afghan economy and public institutions. Yet the promises obscured a starker reality: Mr. Obama had accelerated the timetable for drawing down American troops, and he was looking beyond the war. Speaking to a national TV audience from Bagram Air Base, he suggested that America’s experience in Afghanistan had come full circle. “One year ago, from a base here in Afghanistan, our troops launched the operation that killed Osama bin Laden,” he said. “The goal I set  —   to defeat Al Qaeda, and deny it a chance to rebuild  —   is now within our reach. ” Earlier, Mr. Obama had met for an hour with Mr. Karzai. The two had long had a rocky relationship  —   on an earlier trip, Mr. Obama excoriated Mr. Karzai for the rampant corruption in the Afghan government  —   and this session did little to improve their rapport. Mr. Crocker recalled that the president was “very aloof, almost cold, which bothered me a bit because I’d worked a solid damn year to get Karzai in a better place with us. ” Things never warmed up between them. When Mr. Karzai refused to sign a   security agreement with Washington, Mr. Obama gave up on him to focus on his successor, Ashraf Ghani. The experience left a lasting imprint on the president, his aides said. He concluded that without the right partner, it was impossible for the United States to succeed, no matter how much blood and treasure it poured into a country. It was an insight that Mr. Obama applied to his relations with other countries, from Pakistan to Israel, where his poor relationships with the leaders impeded progress. “The most underappreciated part of foreign policy,” Mr. Rhodes said, “is dealing with flawed partners. ” When Mr. Obama convened his National Security Council that day in August 2015, the Taliban were regrouping again. They had carried out audacious terrorist attacks in the center of Kabul and had mounted a military offensive in the provinces of Kunduz and Oruzgan. Worse, there was a new threat in the form of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, which sprouted in the poisonous soil of Iraq after the United States left and was finding recruits in the Hindu Kush. Mr. Obama had rejected a chorus of calls in Washington to delay the drawdown, under which the residual force of American troops was to leave Afghanistan by the end of 2016. “The mantra I heard was that the president does not want to hand off to his successor the mess he inherited,” said Daniel F. Feldman, who served as the special representative to Afghanistan and Pakistan in 2014 and 2015. But as the Islamic State became a dire enough threat to return American troops to Iraq, Mr. Obama felt compelled to change course on Afghanistan. “ISIL thrived in a vacuum in Iraq and it pointed to a similar vacuum in Afghanistan,” Mr. Rhodes said. Mr. Obama, he said, was prodded by more than fear. After a long stretch of political paralysis, Afghanistan formed a government with Mr. Ghani in the presidency. For the first time since taking office, Mr. Obama felt like he had a partner with whom he could do business. The   Afghan Army was taking heavy casualties fighting the Taliban, and the president believed that the United States had an obligation to help them. But as Mr. Obama’s war council met that August morning, the level of American support remained the subject of intense debate. Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. a skeptic about Afghanistan going back to 2009, argued that the country would revert to chaos, regardless of how long the United States stayed there. “It doesn’t matter if we leave tomorrow or 10 years from now,” he declared, according to those in the room. He was, he conceded, a “broken record” on this issue. Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, who had succeeded Admiral Mullen as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, recommended that the United States maintain a military presence in Kabul, and at Bagram and a scattering of bases in the east and south. The 10, 000 soldiers in the country would carry out a singular, ruthless mission of killing suspected terrorists and keeping the country from spiraling out of control. The imperative, General Dempsey told Mr. Obama, was that Afghanistan fit into a broader counterterrorism policy from Central Asia to North Africa to extend “well beyond your presidency,” according to several officials. Mr. Obama liked that idea. It was in line, he said, with the principles he had laid out in a 2014 speech at the United States Military Academy in West Point, N. Y. where he said America would train and equip foreign armies but leave the   fighting to them. He acknowledged that it would mean handing off Afghanistan to his successor as unfinished business. “This goes to the politics of what I’m leaving for the next president,” he told the group, according to one of the participants. “My interest is not to sign them up for 10 years of X,” he added, referring to troop numbers, “but to lay out a vision and to put stakes in the ground for that vision. ” Mr. Obama now seems at an uneasy peace. In the interview in September, he disputed the suggestion that his policy had failed. He had, after all, reduced the number of American troops to fewer than 10, 000 from more than 100, 000. They were training and assisting Afghan troops, even if the line between that and actual combat was sometimes blurry. The country had been broken to begin with, he said, and America was never going to fix it. “Afghanistan was one of the poorest countries in the world with the lowest literacy rates in the world before we got there. It continues to be,” Mr. Obama said. The country “was riven with all kinds of ethnic and tribal divisions before we got there. It’s still there. ” In the end, Afghanistan became the template for a new kind of warfare  —   a chronic conflict, across an arc of unstable states, in which the United States is a participant, if not the principal actor. At a NATO summit meeting in Warsaw in July, Mr. Obama acknowledged that this prospect would disappoint an American public still suffering from combat fatigue. “It’s very hard for us ever to get the satisfaction of MacArthur and the emperor meeting, and a war being officially over,” he said. “As commander in chief of the most powerful military in the world,” he went on, “I spend a lot of time brooding over these issues. And I’m not satisfied we’ve got it perfect yet. ”

0 - On an overcast Friday morning last January, longshoremen all over New York Harbor walked off the docks, bringing the port nearly to a stop for a day. What were the longshoremen’s grievances? What were their demands? Many of the men seemed not to know. They hung around the food trucks and milled about the parking lots, unsure why they had stopped working and unsure what it would take for work to resume. “No one knew what that was about,” one recalled recently. A year later, the reason for the strike remains unclear, even as the agency tasked with ridding the waterfront of organized crime, the Waterfront Commission, has questioned dozens of longshoremen under oath. One told the commission he learned of the strike early that morning, when it was too dark to see the face of the man giving the order. It could have been anyone. It was the old D  D  —   Deaf and Dumb, the classic longshoreman’s response, popularized in the 1954 film “On the Waterfront. ” In that movie, the longshoremen were reluctant, even frightened, to talk to the authorities, whether a priest or a detective, because the mob controlled the waterfront. In the years since, much has changed around New York Harbor the heavy lifting is done not by hand but by cranes, and human voices are scarcely heard amid the beeping of the straddle carriers, giant insectlike machines that move containers back and forth. But even as New York and New Jersey’s increasingly valuable shoreline is claimed by luxury development, investigators say the mob is still present. It is where the daughter of one of the mobsters made famous in the 1997 film “Donnie Brasco” is up for a job where the nephew of another famous mobster pulled down more than $400, 000 in a single year because he was almost never off the clock, not even when he was at home sleeping where three consecutive presidents of a Newark longshoremen’s union were convicted of extortion. There is physical evidence as well, like the $51, 900 wrapped in cellophane that was discovered buried in the backyard of a longshoreman. It was, according to federal agents in a 2010 affidavit, the tribute that a group of Newark longshoremen paid the Genovese crime family each Christmas. “You will need another generation or two to get the mob out of this port, because they are very well entrenched,” said one longshoreman who requested anonymity because of a concern for his safety and his livelihood. Those who step out of line, he said, face being reassigned from   jobs unloading container ships to the cruise ship terminals, where the work and the pay is far less. While investigators say the mob and the waterfront remain entwined, both institutions are much diminished today, pushed to the margins of New York City. The  finger piers that once extended from much of Manhattan and Brooklyn are mostly gone.  These days the most famous shipping line in the city is the Circle Line, which does sightseeing tours. Container ships generally head across the harbor to New Jersey, toward the ports of Elizabeth, Newark and Bayonne. They unload at a number of terminals, one of which is owned by a Canadian teachers’ pension fund. The pay is pretty good on the docks  —   plenty of longshoremen make well over $100, 000  —   but the work is often dreary and dangerous. “It’s a funny thing about this port,” a hiring agent at Port Newark named Pasquale Pontoriero was overheard saying in a 2009 wiretap, a few years before his license was revoked because he had associated with organized crime figures. “I call it the Broadway of broken dreams. ” Perhaps the starkest difference at the port today is in how many machines there are, and how few people. A century ago New York Harbor employed 40, 000 longshoremen, who unloaded ships with hook and sling and brawn. Today, the entire workforce is just under 3, 400 longshoremen, many perched behind the controls of cranes and straddle carriers. Yet amid all the transformation, some investigators say, racketeers and mobsters are still as present as the barnacles attached to the piers. In the view of Walter M. Arsenault, the executive director of the Waterfront Commission, the fundamental relationship between the waterfront and the mob remains unchanged since “On the Waterfront. ” “The only difference is now, it’s in color,” Mr. Arsenault said. He based that assessment on several indicators, such as the number of relatives of   figures who continue to hold choice jobs, many of which involve little work and pay unusually high salaries, like the union shop steward position held by Ralph Gigante, the nephew of the boss of the Genovese family, the late Vincent (Chin) Gigante. Ralph Gigante earned $419, 000 in 2014, and has said he believes he holds the union office for life  —   “until death do us part. ” There is also the fact that some of the same New York and New Jersey union officials whom federal prosecutors have in the past accused of racketeering have since risen to the top ranks of the East Coast waterfront union, the International Longshoremen’s Association. One is Harold J. Daggett, the garrulous president, who owns a   yacht, the Obsession, and has been spotted by his members riding in a Bentley. One longshoreman said he had been surprised to catch sight of a holster strapped to Mr. Daggett’s ankle during a meeting. The Justice Department, which has lost two cases against Mr. Daggett, has described him as an “associate” of the Genovese crime family whose rise through the union ranks was part of the mob’s plan. A good portion of the Justice Department’s evidence against him came from the testimony of an aged mob turncoat, George Barone, who had once been a waterfront enforcer for the Genovese family and who described Mr. Daggett as thoroughly under the mob’s control. But Mr. Daggett, on trial in 2005, took the witness stand and portrayed himself as a mob target, describing a 1980 episode in which Mr. Barone had put a gun to his head and threatened to kill him and his family  —   an incident that so terrified Mr. Daggett he urinated in his pants, according to news accounts. During that trial, one of Mr. Daggett’s   a reputed mobster named Lawrence Ricci, went missing. Several weeks after the men were acquitted, Mr. Ricci’s decomposing body was found in the trunk of a car outside a New Jersey diner. The murder, which Mr. Arsenault said is the last known waterfront killing, remains unsolved. Mr. Daggett declined, through the longshoremen’s association’s spokesman, to be interviewed. But alluding to his brushes with the Justice Department, Mr. Daggett joked at a union conference in Puerto Rico in 2015 that when he was invited to the White House for a labor meeting, “I thought I might have a better chance ending up in the big house, but there I was, your I. L. A. president, at the White House. ” But Mr. Daggett’s lawyer in that 2005 trial, George Daggett (his cousin) said in a recent interview that “the mob on the waterfront is a myth”  —   something that has not been true for half a century. Mr. Daggett, who frequently represents longshoremen in litigation with the Waterfront Commission, said that the agency prefers to pretend “we’re still in the ’50s. ” “They can’t say, ‘We got rid of the mob,’ because then there’s no reason for them to be in existence,” George Daggett said. “I challenge them to prove mob influence on the piers. What have they come up with? A couple of guys here and a stray guy there?” The mob’s grip over the New York waterfront began nearly a century ago and was predicated on a few simple facts: The work was uneven, depending on a ship’s arrival time, and yet the cargo needed to be unloaded quickly, so that produce did not spoil and the shelves of America’s stores could remain stocked. Gangsters quickly realized that the piers were the choke point of the economy, and that a dizzying array of rackets were available to them. They pilfered cargo as it came ashore and extorted truckers who had come to collect cargo or drop it off. And, most cruelly, the mob controlled which of the longshoreman would be selected to work. Theirs was some of the most dangerous work in the country, but longshoremen had to beg to get it. At the   on the piers, where longshoremen would gather each morning in the hope of joining the group that would work on an arriving ship, it was common for a man to place a toothpick behind his ear, a signal that he would kick back some of his pay. All this began to change with containerization, as goods were no longer shipped loose but packed into containers that stacked efficiently, and transferred easily between ships and trucks and trains. With cranes doing the lifting, the number of longshoremen plummeted by more than 90 percent. Today, advances in automation threaten to reduce the number of longshoremen even further. As the workforce dwindled, the remaining jobs became well paid. This was a result of a shrewd move by the longshoremen’s association: The union negotiated a flat fee, today roughly $5 a ton, that the shipping industry would pay into various funds to provide an income for   longshoremen and supplement the benefits and income of those who would work fewer hours as a result. As global trade has soared, the few longshoremen who remain have seen their paychecks grow. The waterfront today has largely receded from the city’s consciousness and even its geography. And to some extent, so has the mob. Decimated by mass prosecutions over the last three decades, New York’s five crime families have struggled to adapt. While there have been some new, profitable ventures, like online gambling, the waterfront still exerts its own pull. Mr. Arsenault referred to the waterfront as the mob’s “last candy jar. ” In recent years, the union has brazenly recommended friends or relatives of organized crime figures for jobs on the docks, said Phoebe S. Sorial, the general counsel for the Waterfront Commission. She said the union has sought waterfront jobs for “people who posted bail for organized figures” and “people who are in business with organized crime figures,” along with any number of relatives. In 2014, for instance, the union recommended the    daughter of one of New York’s most famous mobsters, Benjamin (Lefty) Ruggiero (played by Al Pacino in the film “Donnie Brasco”) Mr. Arsenault said, adding that other such cases abound. “You can’t throw a rock on either side of the waterfront without hitting a brother, son or daughter of a made member,” Mr. Arsenault said, using the terminology for someone who has been inducted into a crime family. The   Waterfront Commission was formed in 1953 to fight organized crime on the docks. For many years, before it came under new leadership in 2008, it was a   and sleepy agency. Since then it has focused on extensive background checks, mapping the familial relationships between mobsters and longshoremen  —   an elaborate genealogy project. The Gigantes, for instance, have 10 relatives  —   mostly nephews,   and grandsons  —   working on the waterfront, according to the commission. This kind of blatant nepotism was impressive if not especially unusual. And yet Mr. Daggett, the union president, objects to the assumption that these sorts of arrangements necessarily signal corruption. “There is an old saying,” he once proclaimed at a public hearing, slightly stretching the degree of kinship in the adage, “‘The son or a nephew should not carry the sins of a father or an uncle. ’” Many of those with relatives in organized crime say the insinuation that they themselves are mixed up in racketeering is hurtful, untrue and yet maybe inescapable. “When I started out, people were a little standoffish because of fear, because of my ancestors,” James Anastasio said. His father’s uncle was Albert Anastasia, once the head of what the press called Murder, Inc. he was “Lord High Executioner,” as his 1957 obituary in The Daily News put it. “Although once they got to know me and realized I had nothing to do with that, they treated me as a normal person. ” Mr. Anastasio, who runs a training institute for longshoremen and is also an executive at a crane company, said that in his long career on the waterfront, “I’ve never really come across the mob. ” “As far as I know, no, the mob is no longer on the waterfront,” he added. “I can’t say there are not small pockets of bad people, but as far as big influence  —   not that I’ve seen in my lifetime. ” George Daggett, the lawyer and cousin of the union president, said that the Waterfront Commission has taken to harassing some longshoremen with relatives reputed to be organized crime figures. He cited a lawsuit he had brought on behalf of a longshoreman in New Jersey named Pasquale Falcetti Jr. Mr. Falcetti, he said, was denied a port registration card by the Waterfront Commission for no other reason, apparently, than “who this kid’s father is”  —   Pasquale (Uncle Patty) Falcetti, a convicted racketeer and reputed leader in the Genovese family, currently finishing a federal prison sentence. The union has complained about such aggressive tactics, and the longstanding antipathy between the longshoremen’s association and the Waterfront Commission may have been the driving force behind the strike last year. And yet a spokesman for the longshoremen’s association, James McNamara, said the union did not give the order for the strike and urged the longshoremen to return to work. “What we had heard,” Mr. McNamara said, “was the men were seemingly protesting against the Waterfront Commission and what was perceived as harassment. ” As for the presence of organized crime along the waterfront, Mr. McNamara said the mob had no influence anymore. “They just don’t,” he said. “It’s a highly automated, highly sophisticated industry. ” He added, “You just don’t hear about that at all anymore. ” But another viewpoint was offered two years ago by Sabato (Sal) Catucci, a legendary waterfront figure who operated the stevedoring company that ran the Red Hook docks in Brooklyn until 2011. At a public hearing before the Waterfront Commission in 2010, he protested investigators’ insinuation that the ports were under mob control. He was so wary of being tarred as a mobster that he even chose what to wear with care. “I didn’t come in here with a black shirt today, because I don’t feel that I wanted to be stereotyped,” he said. Yet just a few years later, Mr. Catucci, now locked in a battle over a contract to operate the Red Hook port, accused the longshoremen’s union of threatening him during negotiations. He had been told he would be taken out “in a box,” according to a lawsuit he filed. One vice president of the union “shoved me and threatened to knock me out,” Mr. Catucci said in a 2014 affidavit, in which he claimed that some of the waterfront’s most powerful figures “are, or are associated with, thugs who get their way by intimidation and force. ” Investigators insist that the same rackets that gave life to “On the Waterfront” continue today. Mr. Arsenault checked off the various forms of thievery and extortion, both big and small, that he learned of through his investigations.    containers occasionally disappear, most likely the result of theft. Truckers, in order to be allowed to retrieve their container and leave the port, have been encouraged to buy overpriced bottles of water, or even Girl Scout cookies from the longshoremen, he said. Robert Stewart, a longtime anticorruption prosecutor who until last year had worked in a   role for 13 years to rid a longshoremen’s local in Bayonne of organized crime, said that mob influence on the waterfront was “a tad better” than in the past. “You don’t have bodies showing up,” he said. But he said he wondered whether the mob had not simply directed its attention to a different source of income. For years, investigators have suspected that the mob’s most lucrative targets on the waterfront are the longshoremen benefit funds, including what is known as the “container royalty fund,” the fund that pays extra wages to longshoremen each year as compensation for the diminished work that came with containerization. The funds are worth a great deal of money one received more than $95 million in 2014. They also tend to be rather opaque. “It is an awfully inviting target, and knowing the cast of characters involved here, to think they’re not getting a piece of this is unrealistic,” Mr. Stewart said. The list of employees at the benefits fund, said one law enforcement official, include an accountant and a director of operations who are the children of dead organized crime figures. But John Nardi, the president of the New York Shipping Association, a trade group that has a role in managing the funds, said he had seen no evidence of misconduct. “Based on people’s names you can make a lot of assumptions,” he said. However, he said, “All monies are accounted for. ”

0 - WASHINGTON  —   The whirlwind first week of Donald J. Trump’s presidency had all the bravura hallmarks of a Stephen K. Bannon production. It started with the   inauguration homily to “American carnage” in United States cities   by Mr. Bannon, followed a few days later by his “shut up” message to the news media. The week culminated with a blizzard of executive orders, mostly hatched by Mr. Bannon’s team and the White House policy adviser, Stephen Miller, aimed at disorienting the “enemy,” fulfilling campaign promises and distracting attention from Mr. Trump’s less than flawless debut. But the defining moment for Mr. Bannon came Saturday night in the form of an executive order giving the rumpled   agitator a full seat on the “principals committee” of the National Security Council  —   while downgrading the roles of the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the director of national intelligence, who will now attend only when the council is considering issues in their direct areas of responsibilities. It is a startling elevation of a political adviser, to a status alongside the secretaries of state and defense, and over the president’s top military and intelligence advisers. In theory, the move put Mr. Bannon, a former Navy surface warfare officer, admiral’s aide, investment banker, Hollywood producer and Breitbart News firebrand, on the same level as his friend, Michael T. Flynn, the national security adviser, a former Pentagon intelligence chief who was Mr. Trump’s top adviser on national security issues before a series of missteps reduced his influence. But in terms of real influence, Mr. Bannon looms above almost everyone except the president’s    Jared Kushner, in the Trumpian pecking order, according to interviews with two dozen Trump insiders and current and former national security officials. The move involving Mr. Bannon, as well as the boost in status to the White House homeland security adviser, Thomas P. Bossert, and Mr. Trump’s relationships with cabinet appointees like Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, have essentially layered over Mr. Flynn. Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary, said Mr. Bannon  —   whose Breitbart website was a magnet for white nationalists, antiglobalists and conspiracy theorists  —   always planned to participate in national security. Mr. Flynn welcomed his participation, Mr. Spicer said, but the general “led the reorganization of the N. S. C. ” in order to streamline an antiquated and bloated bureaucracy. Former White House officials in both parties were shocked by the move. “The last place you want to put somebody who worries about politics is in a room where they’re talking about national security,” said Leon E. Panetta, a former White House chief of staff, defense secretary and C. I. A. director in two Democratic administrations. “I’ve never seen that happen, and it shouldn’t happen. It’s not like he has broad experience in foreign policy and national security issues. He doesn’t. His primary role is to control or guide the president’s conscience based on his campaign promises. That’s not what the National Security Council is supposed to be about. ” That opinion was shared by President George W. Bush’s last chief of staff, Josh Bolten, who barred Karl Rove, Mr. Bush’s political adviser, from N. S. C. meetings. A president’s decisions made with those advisers, he told a conference audience in September, “involve life and death for the people in uniform” and should “not be tainted by any political decisions. ” Susan E. Rice, President Barack Obama’s last national security adviser, called the arrangement “stone cold crazy” in a tweet posted Sunday. Mr. Spicer said the language the Trump White House used in its N. S. C. executive order is, with the exception of Mr. Bannon’s position  —   which was created during the transition  —   almost identical in content to one the Bush administration drafted in 2001. And Mr. Obama’s top political operative, David Axelrod, sat in on some N. S. C. meetings, he added. There were key differences. Mr. Axelrod never served as a permanent member as Mr. Bannon will now, though he sat in on some critical meetings, especially as Mr. Obama debated strategy in Afghanistan and Pakistan. “It’s a profound shift,” Mr. Axelrod said. “I don’t know what his bona fides are to be the principal foreign policy adviser to the president. ” But Mr. Bannon’s elevation does not merely reflect his growing influence on national security. It is emblematic of Mr. Trump’s trust on a range of political and ideological issues. During the campaign, the sly and provocative Mr. Bannon played a paradoxical role  —   calming the easily agitated candidate during his frequent rough patches and egging him on when he felt Mr. Trump needed to fire up the white   base. The president respects Mr. Bannon because he is independently wealthy and therefore does not need the job, and both men ascribe to a    credo when put on the defensive, according to the former Trump campaign manager Corey Lewandowski. Mr. Bannon is a deft operator within the White House, and he has been praised by Republicans who view him skeptically as the most knowledgeable on policy around the president. But his stated preference for blowing things up  —   as opposed to putting them back together  —   may not translate to his new role. The hasty drafting of the immigration order, and its scattershot execution, brought a measure of Mr. Bannon’s chaotic and hyperaggressive political style to the more predictable administration of the federal government. Within hours of the edict, airport customs and border agents were detaining or blocking dozens of migrant families, some of whom had permanent resident status, until John F. Kelly, the new homeland security secretary, intervened. Mr. Kelly’s department had suggested green card holders be exempted from the order, but Mr. Bannon and Mr. Miller, a   on immigration, overruled him, according to two American officials. Mr. Priebus, speaking on NBC’s “Meet the Press” on Sunday, indicated a softening of the stance, saying the order would not block “green card holders moving forward”  —   but said anyone seeking to enter the country from the listed countries would be subjected to tighter scrutiny. People close to Mr. Bannon said he is not accumulating power for power’s sake, but is instead helping to fill a staff leadership vacuum created, in part, by Mr. Flynn’s stumbling performance as national security adviser. Mr. Flynn still communicates with Mr. Trump frequently, and his staff has been assembling a version of the Presidential Daily Briefing for Mr. Trump, truncated but comprehensive, to be the president’s main source of national security information. During the campaign, he often had unfettered access to the candidate, who appreciated his brash style and contempt for Hillary Clinton, but during the transition, Mr. Flynn privately complained about having to share face time with others. Mr. Flynn “has the full confidence of the president and his team,” Hope Hicks, a spokeswoman for Mr. Trump, said in an email. Emails and phone calls to Mr. Flynn and his top aide were not returned. A president who likes generals and abhors political correctness, Mr. Trump found in Mr. Flynn  —   who joined Trump backers in an   “lock her up!” chant during the campaign  —   perhaps the most politically incorrect general this side of his hero, Gen. George S. Patton. But Mr. Flynn, a lifelong Democrat sacked as head of the Pentagon’s intelligence arm after clashing with Obama administration officials in 2014, has gotten on the nerves of Mr. Trump and other administration officials because of his sometimes overbearing demeanor, and has further diminished his internal standing by presiding over a chaotic and opaque N. S. C. transition process that prioritized the hiring of military officials over civilian experts recommended to him by his own team. Mr. Flynn’s penchant for talking too much was on display on Friday in a meeting with Theresa May, the British prime minister, according to two people with direct knowledge of the events. When Mrs. May said that she understood wanting a dialogue with Mr. Putin but stressed the need to be careful, Mr. Trump asked Mr. Flynn when the two were scheduled to speak. Mr. Flynn replied it was Saturday  —   he had delayed it to fit in Mrs. May’s meeting for “protocol” as a United States ally, adding at length that Mr. Putin was impatient to chat. Mr. Trump, the person said, appeared irritated by the response. Still, the episode that did the most damage to the   relationship occurred in early December when Mr. Flynn’s son, also named Michael, unleashed a series of tweets pushing a discredited conspiracy theory that Clinton associates had run a child   ring out of a Washington pizza restaurant. Mr. Trump told his staff to get rid of the younger Mr. Flynn, who had been hired by his father to help during the transition. But Mr. Trump did so reluctantly because of his loyalty during the campaign, when dozens of former military officials were dismissing Mr. Trump as too unstable to command. “I want him fired immediately,” Mr. Trump said in a muted rendition of his “You’re fired!” line in “The Apprentice,” according to two people with knowledge of the interaction. That has not stopped the general’s son from spouting off: On Saturday, at a time when Trump surrogates were pushing back on the idea that the executive order did not discriminate against any religion, the younger Mr. Flynn tweeted his approval of the policy, adding “#MuslimBan. ” The tweet was subsequently deleted his entire account disappeared later in the day. Still, the national security adviser has also continued to dabble in the kind of   behavior that concerns Mr. Trump’s allies, such as planning to attend an   “Deploraball” event at the time of the inauguration. He was urged to skip it by Trump allies, and ultimately agreed. Both Mr. Trump and Mr. Bannon still regard Mr. Flynn as an asset. “In the room and out of the room, Steve Bannon is General Flynn’s biggest defender,” said Kellyanne Conway, another top adviser to the president. But it is unclear when the maneuvers to reduce Mr. Flynn’s role began. Two Obama administration officials said Trump transition officials inquired about expanded national security roles for Mr. Bannon and Mr. Kushner at the earliest stages of the transition in November  —   before the younger Mr. Flynn became a liability  —   but after Mr. Flynn had begun to chafe on the nerves of his colleagues on the team. Mr. Flynn’s reputation has raised questions among some in the cabinet. Two weeks ago, both men held a meeting with Rex W. Tillerson, Mr. Trump’s pick to run the State Department, Mr. Mattis and Mike Pompeo, now the C. I. A. director, to discuss coordination  —   Mr. Flynn was invited but did not attend. Part of the meeting was devoted to discussing concerns about Mr. Flynn, according to an official with knowledge of it.

0 - ESCONDIDO, Calif.  —   In Southern California in the fall of 2015, a giant natural gas leak not only caused one of the worst environmental disasters in the nation’s history, it also knocked out a critical fuel source for regional power plants. Energy regulators needed a quick fix. But rather than sticking with gas, they turned to a technology more closely associated with flashlights: batteries. They freed up the utilities to start installing batteries  —   and lots of them. It is a solution that’s audacious and risky. The idea is that the batteries can store electricity during daylight hours (when the state’s many solar panels are flooding the grid with power) then release it as demand peaks (early evening, when people get home). In effect, the rechargeable batteries are like an   power plant, and, in theory, able to replace an actual plant. Utilities have been studying batteries nationwide. But none have moved ahead with the gusto of those in Southern California. This idea has   potential. But the challenge of storing electricity has vexed engineers, researchers, policy makers and entrepreneurs for centuries. Even as countless technologies have raced ahead, batteries haven’t yet fulfilled their promise. And the most powerful new designs come with their own risks, such as fire or explosion if poorly made or maintained. It’s the same problem that forced Samsung to recall 2. 5 million Galaxy Note 7 smartphones in September because of fire risk. After racing for months, engineers here in California have brought three   sites close to completion to begin serving the Southern California electric grid within the next month. They are made up of thousands of oversize versions of the   batteries now widely used in smartphones, laptop computers and other digital devices. One of the installations, at a San Diego Gas  Electric operations center surrounded by industrial parks in Escondido, Calif. 30 miles north of San Diego, will be the largest of its kind in the world, developers say. It represents the most crucial test yet of an   technology that many experts see as fundamental to a   future. Here, about 130 miles southeast of Aliso Canyon, the site of the immense gas leak in 2015  —   the   equivalent of operating about 1. 7 million cars over the course of a year  —   19, 000 battery modules the size of a kitchen drawer are being wired together in racks. They will operate out of two dozen beige,    trailers. Made by Samsung, the batteries are meant to store enough energy to serve as a backup in cases of fuel shortages. They are also designed to absorb   energy, particularly solar power, during the day and feed it back to the grid after dusk. They in effect can fill in for the     plants that might lack the fuel to fully operate because of the disastrous leak. “California is giving batteries the opportunity to show what they can do,” said Andrés Gluski, chief executive of AES, which is installing the storage systems. AES is installing a smaller array for the electric utility in El Cajon, a suburb east of San Diego. And separately Tesla, the company perhaps better known for its electric cars, has built an array for a different utility on the grid, Southern California Edison, near Chino, Calif. The stakes are high for both energy storage companies. If their projects struggle or fail, it could jeopardize not only the stability of Southern California’s grid but also interest in the technology over all. After a smaller, but pioneering battery project at a wind farm on Oahu in Hawaii went up in flames in 2012, investment in battery storage all but dried up for a few years. That installation, which used 12, 000   batteries to help even out fluctuations in the power flow, caught fire three times in its first 18 months of operation. The storage developer, Xtreme, eventually went bankrupt. The wind farm turned to a different technology to smooth its output. Keeping a close eye on the Southern California battery efforts is Susan Kennedy, who helped shepherd California’s energy policy for more than a decade as a state utility regulator and   operative for two governors  —   Gray Davis, a Democrat, and Arnold Schwarzenegger, a Republican. She now runs an energy storage   one not involved in the   response to the Aliso Canyon gas leak. “The moment one fails,” Ms. Kennedy said of the big bet on batteries, “they won’t build any more. ” As soon as AES’s chief executive, Mr. Gluski, learned last June that San Diego Gas  Electric had awarded AES the big battery contract, he leapt out of his chair and interrupted a meeting in his board room at the company’s headquarters in Arlington, Va. As employees watched in astonishment, he barreled down two flights of stairs, grabbed a mallet and, with a ceremonial flourish, banged a gong that one of his executives kept on hand for big news. Mr. Gluski had not had much occasion to celebrate since he had taken the AES reins five years earlier. The company was struggling with debt and trying to coax profits from     projects around the developing world that are buffeted by instability in politics, currency and commodity prices. His first steps included an austerity program in which he gave up many of his own executive perks: No more   membership. No more corporate Audi A8, with driver. But the more   part of his plan would be AES’s battery division, which was then fledgling. The unit had roots in two midlevel executives who had been speculating about a   future over beers. Those two men, John Zahurancik, a science fiction fan, and Chris Shelton, a former physics teacher, had started talking about batteries a decade ago, before electric cars became fashionable or even feasible. In 2006, Mr. Shelton had come across a professor’s paper that predicted a future dominated by electric cars that, when parked, could be connected to the power grid so their batteries could act as storage devices to help balance electricity demand. He and Mr. Zahurancik bounced the idea off some AES colleagues, who said it was at least theoretically feasible. So the two continued their bull sessions but decided that stationary battery arrays may make more sense than relying on electric cars. At the time,   batteries, the standard in consumer products, were widely in use in the transportation and power tool industries, but no one had paired them with the technology necessary to serve the power grid. Earlier   experiments with   and other types of batteries worked only for a year or two before conking out. A different technology, “flow batteries,” which use chemicals dissolved in liquids in tanks, were considered even more experimental. But lithium packs more energy per weight than other metals, offering the promise of greater energy density and longevity. The trick would be to figure out how to harness all that power, which creates heat, while avoiding the fires such batteries have caused in any number of vehicles and gadgets, including Teslas, HP computers, hoverboards and, most recently, Samsung Galaxy Note 7s. The two hit upon a design and persuaded executives to begin a pilot project in 2008. That eventually led to the first commercial   battery on a grid. Mr. Zahurancik, who owns the gong, is now president of AES Energy Storage. Mr. Shelton is now the company’s vice president and chief technology officer. AES does not actually make its batteries but buys them, along with other equipment, from manufacturers like Samsung, LG Chem and Panasonic. It designs and assembles the arrays, stacking the boxy batteries into racks inside   containers. In Escondido, where local radio stations still carry public service announcements about the   shortage, the AES battery packs are being installed at a critical spot on the regional electrical grid: the place where the giant wires from power plants and wind and solar arrays connect to the network of local wires. The batteries are intended to relieve the pressure on the system. Mainly, they will serve as a kind of sponge, soaking up excess or   solar energy during the day and then squeezing it back into the grid in the evening, when demand surges as the sun sets. There is enough capacity in the containers full of batteries to power about 20, 000 homes for four hours. The idea is that they help the utility lessen its dependence on the type of natural gas plants known as “peakers,” which can turn on and off quickly to meet sudden peaks of demand but are generally used only for short periods and at great expense. And peakers, by burning fossil fuel, are also at odds with California’s   goals. The project is also being watched closely by advocates for renewable energy. The reason: If   battery installations work as designed, they would help wind or solar generators to act more like conventional power plants by working steadily even when the sun isn’t shining or the wind isn’t blowing. “Energy storage is really the tool to do renewables integration for a utility infrastructure company like us,” said Josh Gerber, advanced technology integration manager of SDGE, as workers smoothed the   concrete pads that support the containers at the Escondido site. “Without it, you have more risk that the variability of renewables is going to cause reliability problems. ” Under the contract, AES is responsible for making sure the batteries perform for 10 years, after which SDGE will take over. One potential downside is that if the batteries are fully charged and discharged each day, they could degrade more quickly. The executives involved expressed confidence in the design and reliability, despite Samsung’s recent smartphone problems. Not only are these batteries a different configuration than the smartphone units, executives said, but the larger footprint allows for the inclusion of sophisticated monitoring as well as industrial safety and cooling and ventilation equipment. The project, along with the smaller array AES has installed in El Cajon, could provide the    leap Mr. Gluski has been striving for. AES has a deal for an even bigger installation in a $1 billion project in Long Beach with Southern California Edison that is not part of the Aliso Canyon remediation effort it is projected to go online by the end of 2020. The electric company plans to use batteries as part of a plan to replace an aging gas plant along the San Gabriel River. Long term, Mr. Gluski plans to shift the company’s   portfolio  —   still heavily based on coal and natural gas  —   toward more renewable energy. He sees the storage systems as vital components in turning solar and wind energy into a dominant power source in the parts of Latin America, Asia and Africa where AES is active. Whatever progress it has made, AES still has its share of problems, with $20 billion in debt and a stock price less than   the value that it had at the start of the century. It faces wary, if not outright skeptical, treatment by Wall Street utility analysts and energy experts, who say the technology AES is peddling on such a large scale in California remains untested and financially risky. “The problem comes if there is a hiccup with the battery storage business in California,” said Charles Fishman, a utilities analyst at Morningstar. “You don’t have the   parent that can push money to it and keep it out of trouble. ” Despite all the battery activity in California, executives around the utility industry remain cautious. “The reason we don’t have widespread batteries on our system is because it is not   for us,” said Alice Jackson, vice president for strategic revenue initiatives at Xcel, a giant electricity and gas utility serving eight Western and Midwestern states. Xcel has been testing batteries about as long as AES, but almost exclusively in small pilots. “It’s fair to say we don’t have   experience with this technology to say that it is perfect, or a nirvana,” Ms. Jackson said. “It’s something we’ll observe as California goes through its experience. ” California’s latest experiment with batteries is but the latest bout in the state’s long struggle to match its energy needs with its environmental sensibilities. In the early 2000s, after market deregulation and Enron’s notorious manipulation of gas supplies led to blackouts and financial instability among the power companies, state officials decided to lessen reliance on natural gas by encouraging the development of wind and solar. Under Mr. Schwarzenegger, who was governor until 2011, officials pushed through a raft of overlapping regulations that created a boom in renewables, especially solar. But that upended the traditional patterns of supply and demand, making the overall energy system technically and economically difficult to manage. Batteries were the logical solution. But the technology wasn’t fully developed and was still too expensive. In order for companies to make the necessary investments, they needed a signal that there would be a big enough market for their products. So in 2010, the state approved one of the first   mandates, ultimately requiring utilities to install some form of storage equipment in their territories. That set off a flurry of new investment and innovation and, after the sudden closure of the San Onofre nuclear plant on the coast in northwest San Diego County in 2012 when a steam generator tube sprung a leak, new contracts for battery installations. But the Aliso Canyon accident, which began on Oct. 23, 2015, when the Southern California Gas Company first detected the leak, put that process on  . The   gas and intermittent oily mist that spewed forth over almost four months traveled into the surrounding neighborhoods on the strong winds that sweep down from the Santa Susana Mountains. At the same time, it forced the battery strategy into its most   test yet. Now it’s showtime, and the pressure to succeed is high all around. For AES, it could signify an important step for a     relic that is seeking to revitalize itself as a powerhouse in battery storage and other advanced technologies. For   advocates  —   including residents of the Porter Ranch section of Los Angeles, so   that Steven Spielberg chose it as the setting for the 1982 movie “E. T.,” but where many still complain of the rashes, headaches and other debilitating symptoms that drove thousands from their homes during the leak  —   it could be a powerful weapon in the fight to keep the gas depot closed. But the pressure may be highest for the Southern California utilities, their reputations still blackened by waves of forced electricity cuts that followed the Enron debacle. No one wants to contemplate a repeat of that chapter, when blackouts affected factories and even some hospitals. “When the power goes out, people die,” said Ms. Kennedy, the former state official. “Failure is not an option here on any level. ”

0 - Joachim Neander was a   Calvinist theologian who often hiked through a valley outside Düsseldorf, Germany, writing hymns. Neander understood everything around him as a manifestation of the Lord’s will and work. There was no room in his worldview for randomness, only purpose and praise. “See how God this rolling   with beauty as a robe,” one of his verses goes. “Forests, fields, and living   its Master’s glory sings. ” He wrote dozens of hymns like this  —     and  . Then he caught tuberculosis and died at 30. Almost two centuries later, in the summer of 1856, workers quarrying limestone in that valley dug up an unusual skull. It was elongated and almost chinless, and the fossilized bones found alongside it were extra thick and fit together oddly. This was three years before Darwin published “The Origin of Species. ” The science of human origins was not a science the assumption was that our ancestors had always looked like us, all the way back to Adam. (Even distinguishing fossils from ordinary rock was beyond the grasp of many scientists. One popular method involved licking them if the material had animal matter in it, it stuck to your tongue.) And so, as anomalous as these German bones seemed, most scholars had no trouble finding satisfying explanations. A leading theory held that this was the skeleton of a lost, bowlegged Cossack with rickets. The peculiar bony ridge over the man’s eyes was a result of the poor Cossack’s perpetually furrowing his brow in pain  —   because of the rickets. One British geologist, William King, suspected something more radical. Instead of being the remains of an atypical human, they might have belonged to a typical member of an alternate humanity. In 1864, he published a paper introducing it as such  —   an extinct human species, the first ever discovered. King named this species after the valley where it was found, which itself had been named for the ecstatic poet who once wandered it. He called it Homo neanderthalensis: Neanderthal Man. Who was Neanderthal Man? King felt obligated to describe him. But with no established techniques for interpreting archaeological material like the skull, he fell back on racism and phrenology. He focused on the peculiarities of the Neanderthal’s skull, including the “enormously projecting brow. ” No living humans had skeletal features remotely like these, but King was under the impression that the skulls of contemporary African and Australian aboriginals resembled the Neanderthals’ more than “ordinary”   skulls. So extrapolating from his low opinion of what he called these “savage” races, he explained that the Neanderthal’s skull alone was proof of its moral “darkness” and stupidity. “The thoughts and desires which once dwelt within it never soared beyond those of a brute,” he wrote. Other scientists piled on. So did the popular press. We knew almost nothing about Neanderthals, but already we assumed they were ogres and losers. The genesis of this idea, the historian Paige Madison notes, largely comes down to flukes of “timing and luck. ” While King was working, another British scientist, George Busk, had the same suspicions about the Neander skull. He had received a comparable one, too, from the tiny British territory of Gibraltar. The Gibraltar skull was dug up long before the Neander Valley specimen surfaced, but local hobbyists simply labeled it “human skull” and forgot about it for the next 16 years. Its brow ridge wasn’t as prominent as the Neander skull’s, and its features were less imposing it was a woman’s skull, it turns out. Busk dashed off a quick report but stopped short of naming the new creature. He hoped to study additional fossils and learn more. Privately, he considered calling it Homo calpicus, or Gibraltar Man. So, what if Busk  —   “a conscientious naturalist too cautious to make premature claims,” as Madison describes him  —   had beaten King to publication? Consider how different our first impressions of a Gibraltar Woman might have been from those of Neanderthal Man: what feelings of sympathy, or even kinship, this other skull might have stirred. There is a worldview, the opposite of Joachim Neander’s, that sees our planet as a product of only tumult and indifference. In such a world, it’s possible for an entire species to be ground into extinction by forces beyond its control and then, 40, 000 years later, be dug up and made to endure an additional century and a half of bad luck and abuse. That’s what happened to the Neanderthals. And it’s what we did to them. But recently, after we’d snickered over their skulls for so long, it stopped being clear who the boneheads were. I’ll start with a confession, an embarrassing but relevant one, because I would come to see our history with Neanderthals as continually distorted by an unfortunate human tendency to believe in ideas that are, in reality, incorrect  —   and then to leverage that conviction into a feeling of superiority over other people. And in retrospect, I realize I demonstrated that same tendency myself at the beginning of this project. Because I don’t want to come off as   or as pointing fingers, here goes: Before traveling to Gibraltar last summer, I had no idea what Gibraltar was. Or rather, I was sure I knew what Gibraltar was, but I was wrong. I thought it was just that famous Rock  —   an unpopulated hunk of   geology, which, if I’m being honest, I recognized mostly from the Prudential logo: that limestone protuberance at the mouth of the Mediterranean, that elephantine white molar jutting into the sky. True, I was traveling to Gibraltar on short notice when I   the director of the Gibraltar Museum, Clive Finlayson, he told me the museum happened to be starting its annual excavation of a Neanderthal cave there the following week and invited me to join. Still, even a couple of days before I left, when a friend told me she faintly remembered spending an afternoon in Gibraltar once as a teenager, I gently mansplained to her that I was pretty sure she was mistaken: Gibraltar, I told her, wasn’t somewhere you could just go. In my mind, I had privileged access. I pictured myself and Finlayson taking a special little boat. In fact, Gibraltar is a peninsula connected to Spain. It’s a lively British overseas territory, with 30, 000 citizens living in a city on its western side  —   a city with bakeries and clothing stores and tourists buying all the usual kitsch. Some unusual kitsch, too  —   like a laminated child’s place mat I spotted that, in a typical tourist destination, might say something unexceptional like SOMEONE WHO LOVES ME WENT TO GIBRALTAR, but here read WE SHALL NEVER SURRENDER! BRITISH FOREVER! The history of Gibraltar, given its strategic location, is a grinding saga of military sieges and ruthlessly contested changes in ownership. The residue of that strife, today, is a pronounced British patriotism and a   exchange of slights with Spain, which still disputes Britain’s claim to the territory. After Queen Elizabeth II’s Diamond Jubilee, in 2012, when Gibraltar projected towering images of Her Majesty on a   side of the Rock  —   “a clear act of provocation,” one reporter called it  —   Spain began inspecting vehicle after vehicle at the border, backing up the line for hours, stranding the bulk of Gibraltar’s work force, who commute in every day. The afternoon I showed up, activists from a   Spanish political party had crossed into Gibraltar and hung an enormous Spanish flag high up on the Rock. This wasn’t just mischief. It was regarded as an act of symbolic terrorism. When one of the men appeared in court two days later, I read, a woman screamed at him, “Gibraltar will never be Spanish!” She sounded like that defiant place mat come to life. I happened to arrive in Gibraltar the week of the Brexit vote. Up in England, people were thundering about the working class versus elites, sovereignty and immigration, warning that British identity was being fouled by the European project. But in Gibraltar  —   a   fully detached nib of Britain, flanked by water on two sides and Spain on the third  —   the question was less philosophical: If the United Kingdom left the European Union, Spain might seize the opportunity to isolate Gibraltar, leaving the territory to shrivel up, like a flap of dead skin. The Gibraltarian government had already called on the House of Commons for help. There was concern that Spain would jam up the border again and that it might happen right away. Around town, “Remain” signs hung everywhere. The atmosphere was edgy, as though everyone was holding hands, waiting to see whether a meteor would hit. It was like the hairline cracks between so many     and Thems seemed to be widening, and some corrosive, molten goop was seeping out: mutual dependence curdled with contempt. Clearly it was happening back home in America too. All in all, it was a good week to spend in a cave. Gorham’s Cave is on Gibraltar’s   eastern coast: a tremendous opening at the bottom of the sheer face of the Rock, shadowy and   like a cathedral. Its mouth is 200 feet across at the base and 120 feet tall. It tapers asymmetrically like a crumpled wizard’s hat. Neanderthals inhabited Gorham’s Cave on and off for 100, 000 years, as well as a second cave next to it, called Vanguard Cave. The artifacts they left behind were buried as wind pushed sand into the cave. This created a high sloping dune, composed of hundreds of distinct layers of sand, each of which was once the surface of the dune, the floor of the cave. The dune is enormous. It reaches about   of the way up Gorham’s walls, spilling out of the cave’s mouth and onto the rocky beach, like a colossal cat’s tongue lapping at the Mediterranean. Every summer, since 1989, a team of archaeologists has returned to meticulously clear that sand away and recover the material inside. “I realized a long time ago, I won’t live to see the end of this project,” Finlayson, who leads the excavation, told me. “But I think we’re in a great moment. We’re beginning to understand these people after a century of putting them down as apelike brutes. ” Neanderthals are people, too  —   a separate,   branch of our family tree. We last shared an ancestor at some point between 500, 000 and 750, 000 years ago. Then our evolutionary trajectory split. We evolved in Africa, while the Neanderthals would live in Europe and Asia for 300, 000 years. Or as little as 60, 000 years. It depends whom you ask. It always does: The study of human origins, I found, is riddled with vehement disagreements and scientists who readily dismantle the premises of even the most   questions. (In this case, the uncertainty rests, in part, on when, in this long evolutionary process, Neanderthals officially became “Neanderthals. ”) What is clearer is that roughly 40, 000 years ago, just as our own lineage expanded from Africa and took over Eurasia, the Neanderthals disappeared. Scientists have always assumed that the timing wasn’t coincidental. Maybe we used our superior intellects to outcompete the Neanderthals for resources maybe we clubbed them all to death. Whatever the mechanism of this   replacement, it seemed to imply that our kind was somehow better than their kind. We’re still here, after all, and their path ended as soon as we crossed paths. But Neanderthals weren’t the   louts we’ve imagined them to be  —   not just a bunch of Neanderthals. As a review of findings published last year put it, they were actually “very similar” to their contemporary Homo sapiens in Africa, in terms of “standard markers of modern cognitive and behavioral capacities. ” We’ve always classified Neanderthals, technically, as human  —   part of the genus Homo. But it turns out they also did the stuff that, you know, makes us human. Neanderthals buried their dead. They made jewelry and specialized tools. They made ocher and other pigments, perhaps to paint their faces or bodies  —   evidence of a “symbolically mediated worldview,” as archaeologists call it. Their tracheal anatomy suggests that they were capable of language and probably had   raspy voices, like Julia Child. They manufactured glue from birch bark, which required heating the bark to at least 644 degrees Fahrenheit  —   a feat scientists find difficult to duplicate without a ceramic container. In Gibraltar, there’s evidence that Neanderthals extracted the feathers of certain birds  —   only dark feathers  —   possibly for aesthetic or ceremonial purposes. And while Neanderthals were once presumed to be crude scavengers, we now know they exploited the different terrains on which they lived. They took down dangerous game, including an extinct species of rhinoceros. Some ate seals and other marine mammals. Some ate shellfish. Some ate chamomile. (They had regional cuisines.) They used toothpicks. Wearing feathers, eating seals  —   maybe none of this sounds particularly impressive. But it’s what our human ancestors were capable of back then too, and scientists have always considered such behavioral flexibility and complexity as signs of our specialness. When it came to Neanderthals, though, many researchers literally couldn’t see the evidence sitting in front of them. A lot of the new thinking about Neanderthals comes from revisiting material in museum collections, excavated decades ago, and   it with new technology or simply with open minds. The real surprise of these discoveries may not be the competence of Neanderthals but how obnoxiously low our expectations for them have been  —   the bias with which too many scientists approached that other Us. One archaeologist called these researchers “modern human supremacists. ” Inside Gorham’s Cave, archaeologists were excavating what they called a hearth  —   not a physical fireplace but a spot in the sand where, around 50, 000 years ago, Neanderthals lit a fire. Each summer, the Gibraltar Museum employs students from universities in England and Spain to work the dig, and now two young women  —   one from each country  —   sat   under work lights, clearing sand away with the edge of a trowel and a brush to leave a   cube. A black band of charcoal ran through it. The students worked scrupulously, watching for small animal bones or artifacts. They’d pulled out a butchered ibex mandible, a number of mollusk shells and   husks. They’d also found six chunks of fossilized hyena dung, as well as “débitage,” distinctive shards of flint left over when Neanderthals shattered larger pieces to make axes. The cube of sand would eventually be wrapped in plaster and sent for analysis. The sand the two women were sweeping into their dustpans was transferred into plastic bags and marched out of the cave, down to the beach, where other students sieved it. Smaller bones caught in the sieve were bagged and labeled. Even the sand that passed through the sieve was saved and driven back to a lab at the museum, where I would later find three other students picking through it with magnifying glasses and tweezers, searching for tinier stuff  —   rodent teeth,   spines  —   while listening to “Call Me Maybe. ” To an outsider, it looked preposterous. The archaeologists were cataloging and storing absolutely everything, treating this physical material as though it were digital information  —   JPEGs of itself. And yet they couldn’t afford not to: Everything a Neanderthal came into contact with was a valuable clue. (In 28 years of excavations here, archaeologists have yet to find a fossil of an actual Neanderthal.) “This is like putting together a   jigsaw puzzle where you only have five pieces,” Finlayson said. He somehow made this analogy sound exciting instead of hopeless. By that point, the enormousness of what they didn’t know  —   what they could never know  —   had become a distraction for me. One of the dig’s lead archaeologists, Richard Jennings of Liverpool John Moores University, listed the many items they had found around that hearth. “And this is literally just from two squares!” he said. (A “square,” in archaeology, is one meter by one meter sites are divided into grids of squares.) Then Jennings waved wordlessly at the rest of the   cave. Look at the big picture, he was saying imagine what else we’ll find! There was also Vanguard Cave next door, an even more promising site, because while Gorham’s had been partly excavated by less meticulous scientists in the 1940s and ’50s, Finlayson’s team was the first to touch Vanguard. Already they had uncovered a layer of perfectly preserved mud there. (“We suspect, if there’s a place where you’re going to find the first Neanderthal footprint, it will be here,” Finlayson said.) The “resolution” of the caves was incredible the wind blew sand in so fast that it preserved short periods, faithfully, like entries in a diary. Finlayson has described it as “the longest and most detailed record of [Neanderthals’] way of life that is currently available. ” This was the good news. And yet there were more than 20 other nearby caves that the Gibraltar Neanderthals might have used, and they were now underwater, behind us. When sea levels rose around 20, 000 years ago, the Mediterranean drowned them. It also drowned the wooded savanna between Gorham’s and the former coastline  —   where, presumably, the Neanderthals had spent an even larger share of their lives and left even more artifacts. So yes, Jennings was right: There was a lot of cave left to dig through. But it was like looking for needles in a haystack, and the entire haystack was merely the one needle they had managed to find in an astronomically larger haystack. And most of that haystack was now inaccessible forever. I could tell it wasn’t productive to dwell on the problem at this scale, while picking   husks from the hearth, but there it was. “Look, you can almost see what’s happening,” Finlayson eventually said. “The fire and the charcoal, the embers scattering. ” It was true. If you followed that stratum of sand away from the hearth, you could see, embedded in the wall behind us, black flecks where the smoke and cinders from this fire had blown. Suddenly, it struck me  —   though it should have earlier  —   that what we were looking at were the remnants of a single event: a specific fire, on a specific night, made by specific Neanderthals. Maybe this won’t sound that profound, but it snapped that prehistoric abstraction into focus. This wasn’t just a “hearth,” I realized it was a campfire. Finlayson began narrating the scene for me. A few Neanderthals cooked the ibex they had hunted and the mussels and nuts they had foraged and then, after dinner, made some tools around the fire. After they went to sleep and the fire died out, a hyena slinked in to scavenge scraps from the ashes and took a poop. Then  —   perhaps that same night  —   the wind picked up and covered everything with the fine layer of sand that these students were now brushing away. While we stood talking, one of the women uncovered a small flint ax, called a Levallois flake. After 50, 000 years, the edge was still sharp. They let me touch it. One of the earliest authorities on Neanderthals was a Frenchman named Marcellin Boule. A lot of what he said was wrong. In 1911, Boule began publishing his analysis of the first nearly complete Neanderthal skeleton ever discovered, which he named Old Man of La Chapelle, after the limestone cave where it was found. Laboring to reconstruct the Old Man’s anatomy, he deduced that its head must have been slouched forward, its spine hunched and its toes spread like an ape’s. Then, having reassembled the Neanderthal this way, Boule insulted it. This “brutish” and “clumsy” posture, he wrote, clearly indicated a lack of morals and a lifestyle dominated by “functions of a purely vegetative or bestial kind. ” A colleague of Boule’s went further, claiming that Neanderthals usually walked on all fours and never laughed: “  had no smile. ” Boule was part of a movement trying to reconcile natural selection with religion by portraying Neanderthals as closer to animals than to us, he could protect the ideal of a separate, immaculate human lineage. When he consulted with an artist to make a rendering of the Neanderthal, it came out looking like a furry, mean gorilla. Neanderthal fossils kept surfacing in Europe, and scholars like Boule were scrambling to make sense of them, improvising what would later grow into a new interdisciplinary field, now known as paleoanthropology. The evolution of that science was haphazard and often comically unscientific. An exhaustive history by Erik Trinkaus and Pat Shipman describes how Neanderthals became “mirrors that reflected, in all their awfulness and awesomeness, the nature and humanity of those who touched them. ” That included a lot of human blundering. It became clear only in 1957, for example  —   46 years after Boule, and after several   of the Old Man’s skeleton  —   that Boule’s particular Neanderthal, which led him to imagine all Neanderthals as   oafs, actually just had several deforming injuries and severe osteoarthritis. Still, Boule’s influence was  . Over the years, his ideologically tainted image of Neanderthals was often refracted through the lens of other ideologies, occasionally racist ones. In 1930, the prominent British anthropologist Sir Arthur Keith, writing in The New York Times, channeled Boule’s work to justify colonialism. For Keith, the replacement of an ancient, inferior species like Neanderthals by newer, heartier Homo sapiens proved that Britain’s actions in Australia  —   “The white man . .. replacing the most ancient type of brown man known to us”  —   was part of a natural order that had been operating for millenniums. It’s easy to get snooty about all this unenlightened paleoanthropology of the past. But all sciences operate by trying to fit new data into existing theories. And this particular science, for which the “data” has always consisted of scant and somewhat inscrutable bits of rock and fossil, often has to lean on those   even more heavily. “Assumptions, theories, expectations,” the University of Barcelona archaeologist João Zilhão says, “all must come into play a lot, because you are interpreting data that do not speak for themselves. ” Imagine, for example, working in a cave without any skulls or other easily distinguishable fossils and trying to figure out if you’re looking at a Neanderthal settlement or a more recent, modern human one. In the past, scientists might turn to the surrounding artifacts, interpreting more   tools as evidence of Neanderthals and more   tools as evidence of early modern humans. But working that way, it’s easy to miss evidence of Neanderthals’ resemblance to us, because, as soon as you see it, you assume they were us. So many techniques similarly hinge on interpretation and judgment, even perfectly   ones, like “morphometric analysis”  —   identifying fossils as belonging to one species rather than another by comparing particular parts of their anatomy  —   and radiocarbon dating. How the material to be dated is sampled and how results are calibrated are susceptible to drastic revision and bitter disagreement. (What’s more, because of an infuriating quirk of physics, the effectiveness of radiocarbon dating happens to break down around 40, 000 years ago  —   right around the time of the Neanderthal extinction. One of our best tools for looking into the past becomes unreliable at exactly the moment we’re most interested in examining.) Ultimately, a bottomless relativism can creep in: tenuous interpretations held up by webs of other interpretations, each strung from still more interpretations. Almost every archaeologist I interviewed complained that the field has become “overinterpreted”  —   that the ratio of physical evidence to speculation about that evidence is out of whack. Good stories can generate their own momentum. Starting in the 1920s, older and more exciting hominid fossils, like Homo erectus, began surfacing in Africa and Asia, and the field soon shifted its focus there. The Washington University anthropologist Erik Trinkaus, who began his career in the early ’70s, told me, “When I started working on Neanderthals, nobody really cared about them. ” The liveliest question about Neanderthals was still the first one: Were they our direct ancestors or the endpoint of a separate evolutionary track? Scientists called this question “the Neanderthal Problem. ” Some of the theories worked up to answer it encouraged different visions of Neanderthal intelligence and behavior. The “Multiregional Model,” for example, which had us descending from Neanderthals, was more inclined to see them as capable, sympathetic and fundamentally human the opposing “Out of Africa” hypothesis, which held that we moved in and replaced them, cast them as comparatively inferior. For decades, when evidence of a more advanced Neanderthal way of life turned up, it was often explained away, or mobbed by enough contrary or undermining interpretations that, over time, it never found real purchase. Some findings broke through more than others, however, like the discovery of what was essentially a small Neanderthal cemetery, in Shanidar Cave, in what is now Iraqi Kurdistan. There had been many compelling instances of Neanderthals’ burying their dead, but Shanidar was harder to ignore, especially after soil samples revealed the presence of huge amounts of pollen. This was interpreted as the remains of a funerary floral arrangement. An archaeologist at the center of this work, Ralph Solecki, published a book called “Shanidar: The First Flower People. ” It was 1971  —   the Age of Aquarius. Those flowers, he’d go on to write, proved that Neanderthals “had ‘soul. ’’u2009” Then again, Solecki’s idea was eventually discredited. In 1999, a more thorough analysis of the Shanidar grave site found that Neanderthals almost certainly did not leave flowers there. The pollen had been tracked in, thousands of years later, by burrowing,   rodents. (That said, even a   later, there are still paleoanthropologists at work on this question. It might not have been gerbils it may have been bees.) As more supposed anomalies surfaced, they became harder to brush off. In 1996, the paleoanthropologist   Hublin and others used CT scanning technology to   a bone fragment found in a French cave decades earlier, alongside a raft of advanced tools and artifacts, associated with the   Châtelperronian industry, which archaeologists always presumed was the work of early modern humans. Now Hublin’s analysis identified the bone as belonging to a Neanderthal. But rather than reascribe the Châtelperronian industry to Neanderthals, Hublin chalked up his findings to “acculturation”: Surely the Neanderthals must have learned how to make this stuff by watching us. “To me,” says Zilhão, the University of Barcelona archaeologist, “there was a logical shock: If the paradigm forces you to say something like this, there must be something wrong with the paradigm. ” Zilhão published a stinging critique challenging the field to shake off its “  prejudice. ” Papers were fired back and forth, igniting what Zilhão calls “a   war” and counting. Then, in the middle of that war, geneticists shook up the paradigm completely. A group at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany, led by Svante Paabo, had been assembling a draft sequence of a Neanderthal genome, using DNA recovered from bones. Their findings were published in 2010. It had already become clear by then that Homo sapiens and Neanderthals appeared in Eurasia separately  —   “Out of Africa was essentially right”  —   but Paabo’s work revealed that before the Neanderthals disappeared, the two groups mated. Even today, 40, 000 years after our gene pools stopped mixing, most living humans still carry Neanderthal DNA, making up roughly 1 to 2 percent of our total genomes. The data shows that we also apparently bred with other hominids, like the Denisovans, about which very little is known. It was staggering even Paabo couldn’t bring himself to believe it at first. But the results were the results, and they carried a sort of empirical magnetism that archaeological evidence lacks. “Geneticists are much more powerful, numerous and incomparably better funded than anyone else dealing with this stuff,” Zilhão said. He joked: “Their aura is kind of miraculous. It’s a bit like receiving the Ten Commandments from God. ” Paabo’s work, and a continuing wave of genomic research, has provided clarity but also complexity, recasting our oppositional,   relationship into something more communal and collaborative  —   and perhaps not just on the genetic level. The extent of the interbreeding supported previous speculation, by a minority of paleoanthropologists, that there might have been cases of Neanderthals and modern humans living alongside each other, intermeshed, for centuries, and that generations of their offspring had found places in those communities, too. Then again, it’s also possible that some of the interbreeding was forced. Paabo now recommends against imagining separate species of human evolution altogether: not an Us and a Them, but one enormous “metapopulation” composed of shifting clusters of essentially   things that periodically coincided in time and space and, when they happened to bump into one another, occasionally had sex. Lunch happened at the mouth of Gorham’s Cave, out in the sun. I ate a sandwich on a log, facing the sea, alongside Jennings and a few of his Liverpool students, while the young men and women from Spain mingled behind us, laughing and stretching and helping one another crack their backs. The language barrier seemed to discourage the two cohorts from talking much. And yet the students lived together during the excavation and had somehow achieved a muffled camaraderie. Even Jennings and his counterpart, José María Gutiérrez López, a veteran archaeologist from a museum in Cádiz, had a somewhat similar dynamic, despite working closely together for many summers at Gorham’s. Neither was terribly fluent in the other’s language, but their silence, by this point, seemed warm and knowing. Waiting for our ride at the end of one workday, I noticed them staring at a plastic bag snagged in the concertina wire above an old military gate. The bag had been there for a long, long time, Jennings told me. Then he turned and uttered, “Cinco años?” Gutiérrez López smiled. “Sí,” he said, nodding. I, meanwhile, felt compelled to test out all of this as a model for   relations. That contact obsessed me: What would it have been like to look out over a grassy plain and watch parallel humanity pass by? Scientists often turn to historical first contacts as frames of reference, like the arrival of Europeans among Native Americans, or Captain Cook landing in Australia  —   largely histories of violence and subjugation. But as Zilhão points out, typically one of those two cultures set out to conquer the other. “Those people were conscious that they’d come from somewhere else,” he told me. “They were a product of a civilization that had books, that had studied their past. ” Homo sapiens encountering Neanderthals would have been different: They met uncoupled from politics and history neither identified as part of a network of millions of supposedly more advanced people. And so, as Finlayson put it to me: “Each valley could have told a different story. In one, they may have hit each other over the head. In another, they may have made love. In another, they ignored each other. ” It’s a kind of coexistence that our modern imaginations may no longer be sensitive enough to envision. So much of our identity as a species is tied up in our anomalousness, in our dominion over others. But that narcissistic   is an exceedingly recent privilege. (“Outside the world of Tolkienesque fantasy literature, we tend to think that it is normal for there to be just one human species on Earth at a time,” the writers Dimitra Papagianni and Michael A. Morse explain. “The past 20 or 30 millennia, however, have been the exception. ”) Now, eating lunch, I considered that the   of humans and Neanderthals hadn’t been so trippy or profound after all. Maybe it looked as mundane as this: two groups, lingering on a beach, only sort of acknowledging each other. Maybe the many millenniums during which we shared Eurasia was, much of the time, like a superlong elevator ride with strangers. Some paleoanthropologists are starting to reimagine the extinction of Neanderthals as equally prosaic: not the culmination of some epic clash of civilizations but an aggregate result of a long, ecological muddle. Strictly speaking, extinction is what happens after a species fails to maintain a higher proportion of births to deaths  —   it’s a numbers game. And so the real competition between Neanderthals and early modern humans wasn’t localized quarrels for food or territory but a quiet,   demographic marathon: each species repopulating itself, until one fell so far behind that it vanished. And we had a big head start. “When modern humans came,” notes Chris Stringer, a paleoanthropologist at Britain’s Natural History Museum, “there just weren’t that many Neanderthals around. ” For millenniums, some scientists believe, before modern humans poured in from Africa, the climate in Europe was exceptionally unstable. The landscape kept flipping between temperate forest and cold, treeless steppe. The fauna that Neanderthals subsisted on kept migrating away, faster than they could. Though Neanderthals survived this turbulence, they were never able to build up their numbers. (Across all of Eurasia, at any point in history, says John Hawks, an anthropologist at the University of   “there probably weren’t enough of them to fill an N. F. L. stadium. ”) With the demographics so skewed, Stringer went on, even the slightest modern human advantage would be amplified tremendously: a single innovation, something like sewing needles, might protect just enough babies from the elements to lower the infant mortality rate and allow modern humans to conclusively overtake the Neanderthals. And yet Stringer is careful not to conflate innovation with superior intelligence. Innovation, too, can be a function of population size. “We live in an age where information, where good ideas, spread like wildfire, and we build on them,” Stringer told me. “But it wasn’t like that 50, 000 years ago. ” The more members your species has, the more likely one member will stumble on a useful new technology  —   and that, once stumbled upon, the innovation will spread you need sufficient human tinder for those sparks of culture to catch. “There was nothing inevitable about modern human success,” Stringer says. “It was luck. ” We didn’t defeat the Neanderthals we just swamped them. Trinkaus compares it to how European wildcats are currently disappearing, absorbed into much larger populations of house cats gone feral. It wasn’t a flattering analogy  —   we are the house cats  —   but that was Trinkaus’s point: “I think a lot of this is basically banal,” he says. Showing me around the Gibraltar Museum one morning, Finlayson described the petering out of Neanderthals on the Rock with unnerving pathos. Gibraltar, with its comparatively stable climate, would have been one of their last refuges, he explained, and he likened the population there to critically endangered species today, like snow leopards or imperiled butterflies: living relics carrying on in small, fragmented populations long after they’ve passed a genetic point of no return. “They became a ghost species,” Finlayson said. We happened to be standing in front of two Neanderthals, exquisitely lifelike sculptures the museum unveiled last spring, on a sweep of sand in their own austere gallery. They were scientific reconstructions, extrapolated by artists from casts of actual fossils. (These two were based on the only Neanderthal skulls ever recovered in Gibraltar: that first woman’s skull, sent to George Busk in 1864, and another, of a child, unearthed in 1926.) They were called Nana and Flint. Finlayson’s wife, Geraldine, and son, Stewart  —   both scientists who work closely with him at the museum  —   had helped him come up with the names. The boy had his arms thrown around Nana’s waist, his cheek on her thigh. He was   himself behind her leg, as kids do, but also stared out, straight at us, slightly alarmed, or helpless. “I don’t get tired of looking at them,” Finlayson said. He had commissioned the Neanderthals from Dutch artists known as Kennis  Kennis, and he was initially taken aback by the woman’s posture in their sketches. She stood oddly, with her arms crossed in front of her chest, resting on opposite shoulders, as if she were  . But Kennis  Kennis barraged him with ethnographic photos: real   people standing just like this, or even more strangely, their hands behind their necks or slung over their heads. As it happens, the artists had an intense personal interest in where human beings leave their hands when they don’t have pockets. I’d never thought about this before  —   I’ve always had pockets  —   and I wondered if artists might expose these perceptual bubbles more pointedly than archaeologists. Kennis  Kennis appeared to be major players in the tiny field of Paleolithic reconstruction. Scientists who had worked with them encouraged me to seek them out. “They’re great people,” one archaeologist told me. “Hyperactive. Like rubber balls. ” The Kennis brothers, Adrie and Alfons, are each 50 years old: identical twins. They are sturdy, attractive men, with dark, wildly swirling hair, and live in the small Dutch city of Arnhem, southeast of Amsterdam. When I arrived at Adrie’s house last summer, I found Alfons at the end of the driveway, glasses sliding down his nose, carefully filling a crack in the robin’   butt cheek of a silicon Neanderthal mold. Kennis  Kennis had gradually   Adrie’s house as a second studio. Most of their work and materials were here:   headless bodies of various human species and a wall of shelves filled with skulls and heads. The heads were frighteningly realistic, with glass eyes and fleshy faces that begged to be touched. When the brothers fly around Europe to pitch to museums, they take these heads with them, like salesmen’s samples. “On the airplane! We have heads!” Adrie shouted. “They scan things!” Alfons shouted. And slowly I understood: The brothers thought it was hilarious that airport security never questioned them about their duffel bags full of heads. “I never have to open my bags!” Adrie said, then he scampered to the wall, where a particular head had caught his eye: very   with a rough, bushy beard and rawness in its upper lip  —   a reconstruction of a primitive Homo sapiens skull found in Morocco. Adrie held the head in his palm and hollered, “Bowling!” while pretending to bowl with it. Then he laughed and laughed and laughed. That was how it went for the rest of the day. They spoke in a bifurcated riot, seldom finishing sentences, just skipping ahead once they had spit out the key words. And if a thought escaped them or their English faltered, they didn’t go silent instead, they repeated the last word, or made a strange guttural drone, as if thrusting some heavy weight over their heads, to fill the space. Their first big commission came in 2006, for the Neanderthal Museum, on the site of Neander Valley. It emerged as a jovial,   old man, with woefulness, or maybe just exhaustion, behind his eyes. That jolt of Neanderthal individuality has been a trademark of their work ever since. It elevates Neanderthals out of a single homogeneous abstraction and endows them with personhood. (At one point, Adrie described watching a neighbor spend an entire day   each brick of his driveway. He had an epiphany: “All the types of people around us, there must have been Neanderthals just like them. ” Alfons added: “Neanderthal neat freaks! Neanderthal Bill Gates! ”) What the brothers want, they told me, is for the viewer to catch herself relating to the Neanderthal  —   to recognize, in a visceral way, that Neanderthals sit at the fragile edge of our own identities. To feel that, Adrie explained, “they need to look you in the eye. ” They were obsessed  —   the only word for it  —   and have been since age 7, when Alfons found a picture of a Neanderthal skeleton in a book, and it instantly possessed them both. They spent a lot of time at their parents’ restaurant, after school and on weekends: With nothing to do, they started drawing Neanderthals. They drew feverishly, combatively, each brother keenly aware of whose rib cage looked brawnier, who had rendered more beautiful shadows on his Neanderthal’s upper lip. “We were both the dumbest guys in the whole school!” Alfons said. “We couldn’t count!” Drawing was all they knew how to do. As young men, they tried to teach art but couldn’t find steady employment. Their family told them to give up their crazy preoccupation. They wouldn’t. They made art at night and took custodial jobs at a psychiatric hospital. They organized the Christmas talent show and played   with the residents. Initially they were painters, not sculptors. They made   reconstructions only to have lifelike models to paint: They were that meticulous, that fixated on knowing how the musculature of a Neanderthal hung off its skeleton. Because they had to produce a   individual, the brothers were forced to make decisions about what paleoanthropologists had the luxury of describing as spectra of variation. Geneticists can suggest a probable scope of skin and hair colors. But the brothers must imagine the wear on a particular Neanderthal’s skin after a hard life outside, or the abuse his toenails would take. And would Neanderthals wear ponytails? Would they shear their bangs away, to get their hair out of their faces? “Every culture does something with their hair!” Alfons insisted. “There’s no culture that does nothing with their hair. ” This uncorked a frantic seminar on known global hairstyles of the last several thousand years. They began pulling up photos on Adrie’s laptop, dozens of them, from anthropological archives or stills from old ethnographic films. These were some of the same photos they had shown Finlayson. The brothers had pored over them for years but still gasped or bellowed now as each new, improbable human form materialized. The pictures showed a panorama of divergent body types and grooming: spiky eyebrows astonishingly asymmetrical breasts a towering aboriginal man with the chiseled torso of an American underwear model, but two twigs for legs a Hottentot woman with an extraordinarily convex rear end. “People would never let us make buttocks like this!” Alfons said regretfully. “All this variation! It’s beautiful!” shouted Adrie, refusing to look away from the screen. He had to look: These were reaches of reality that our minds didn’t travel to on their own. “If you live in the West, you’d never imagine,” he went on. The brothers’ delight seemed to come from feeling all these superficial differences quiver against a profound,   sameness. Finally, Adrie turned to me and said very seriously, “These are all Homo sapiens. ” They showed me more photos. “It’s real, it’s real, it’s real!” Alfons kept shouting. Adrie said, “Unimaginable, unimaginable, unimaginable!” It only registered later: I had spent the day with identical twins who, since childhood, have been stupefied by how different human beings can be. At the rear of Gorham’s Cave, past the hearth the team was excavating, there was a tall metal staircase. It led up to a long catwalk, which led to a locked steel gate. I waited there one morning while Finlayson fumbled around in his pocket. Then he turned his key. The excavation had worked through this narrowed rear chamber of the cave years earlier and discovered, at the end of the 2012 season, an engraving on the floor: a crosshatched pattern of 13 grooves in the bedrock. A tide of specialists flowed into Gorham’s. They determined that the engraving was made at least 39, 000 years ago and ruled out its having been created inadvertently  —   left over after skinning an animal, say. In controlled experiments, it took between 188 and 317 strokes with a flint tool to create the entire figure. “What we’ve always said,” Finlayson explained, “is it’s intentional and it’s not functional. You can call that art, if you like. ” The finding was published in The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences in 2014. The news media called the engraving “the hashtag. ” One scientist described the elaborate crosshatch as watershed evidence of Neanderthals’ capacity for “complex symbolic thought” and “abstract expression. ” But several archaeologists told me they believe that there are many clearer signs of Neanderthals’ capacity for complex cognition and symbolism, including a discovery in Southern France last year that seemed to dwarf the hashtag’s significance. (More than 1, 000 feet into the Bruniquel Cave, Neanderthals assembled two rings of 400 deliberately broken stalagmites, with other material piled and propped around it  —   like a labyrinth, or a shrine.) But Finlayson was undaunted. He turned the hashtag into a logo for the   rebranding of his museum. There was a hashtag decal on the van he picked me up in every morning. We stood and talked for a while until, finally, with Richard   aplomb, Finlayson lifted a tarp and showed it to me. It did not make a tremendous impact at first  —   it was lines in rock. But Finlayson went on, pointing to a spot near the entrance to this isolated anteroom, a few feet across from the engraving, where the team had excavated another hearth. Neanderthals built fires in that exact spot, on and off, for 8, 000 years, he said  —   until their disappearance from Gibraltar. But few animal bones were recovered here it wasn’t a place they cooked. And the location of the fire was also puzzling: Neanderthals usually situated fires at the fronts of caves, to control smoke. And yet, Finlayson explained, “if you look up, this has a natural chimney. ” We flung our heads back: A chute coursed through the high, craggy ceiling above us. It seemed, Finlayson explained, that the Neanderthals did their butchering and cooking at the front of Gorham’s, then retired here at night. Lighting a fire at this hearth would block the narrowest point in the cave, sealing off this chamber from predators. You could hang out here, Finlayson said, “have a   snack or something,” then head to bed. “See there?” he said, motioning to a smaller opening to our right. It led to a second room, similar to this one. “This,” Finlayson said, “is the bedroom. ” I looked again at the hashtag. It wasn’t on the cave floor, exactly, as it was usually described, but on a broad ledge, a foot or two off the ground. It made for a perfect bench, and it was suddenly easy to imagine a Neanderthal sitting on it, in ideal proximity to the fire. For all I knew, the hashtag marked his or her favorite seat. But Finlayson wasn’t done. After the Neanderthal artifacts disappear from Gorham’s sediment layers, there’s a gap of many thousand years  —   a thick stack of empty sand. Then other artifacts appear: Modern humans occupied the cave and built a fire here, too, just a couple of feet from the Neanderthals’ hearth. They used the bedroom annex as well. They left a cave painting on the wall in there: a gorgeous red stag, indisputably recognizable to us  —   their descendants  —   as art. Another 18, 000 years passed, give or take. The Phoenicians came. And they left offerings back here there were shards of their ceramics under the catwalk we had just crossed. Then, 2, 000 years after that, in 1907, a certain Captain A. Gorham of Britain’s Second Battalion Royal Munster Fusiliers arrived. Gorham didn’t discover Gorham’s Cave, Finlayson told me it had always been impossible to miss. “That’s what he found,” Finlayson said. “That’s really Gorham’s Cave. ” He pointed to the bedroom, and we both turned, bathing it with our headlamps. Beside the entrance was written, in big block letters, GORHAM’S CAVE 1907, with a chunky black arrow pointing to the doorway. Gorham had written his name directly over the spot where, some 39, 000 years earlier, a Neanderthal had made his or her own mark. The full sweep and synchronicity of this history hadn’t seemed to occur to Finlayson before. Hesitantly, he said, “Maybe there are special places in the world that have universal human appeal. ” I felt a similar, uncanny rush when I noticed that, at some point while he talked, we had each instinctually taken a seat on the rock ledge, next to the hashtag, and were now sitting side by side, staring into space where the two ancient campfires once burned. It’s not an especially spiritual experience when one human being walks into another human being’s kitchen for the first time and simply knows where the silverware drawer is. At the back of Gorham’s, though, that intuition was spread across two distinct kinds of humans and tens of thousands of years. Ultimately, why we are here and the Neanderthals are not can no longer be explained in a way that implies that our existence is particularly meaningful or secure. But at least moments like this placed our existence inside some longer,    continuity. It was the day of the Brexit vote. After   from the cave with Finlayson, I would spend the rest of the afternoon rejiggering my travel plans in a mild panic, trying to catch a ride out of Gibraltar and into Spain that night, so that if the Spanish exacted a retaliatory   after the results were announced, I could still make my flight home from Malaga the next day. I won’t describe the scenes I saw that morning  —   the blankness on people’s faces at the airport, phone calls I overheard  —   except to say that when I woke up on Nov. 9, after our own election, I felt equipped with at least a faint frame of reference. Reality seemed heightened and a little dangerous, because for so many people, including me, it had broken away from our expectations. We had misunderstood the present in the same way archaeologists can misunderstand the past. What was possible was suddenly exposed as grossly insufficient, because, to borrow Finlayson’s metaphor, we never imagined that the few jigsaw puzzle pieces we based it on constituted such a tiny part of the whole. Even some on the winning sides seemed similarly stunned and adrift. Many, though, just felt vindicated. Later that summer, I came across an essay for a British weekly by the actress Elizabeth Hurley, a fervent Leave supporter, who was now doubling down. “Knock yourselves out calling us   Neanderthals,” she wrote, “and spit a bit more venom and vitriol our way. You are showing yourselves in all your meanspirited,   elitist glory. ” When I read that, I took genuine umbrage  —   but on the Neanderthals’ behalf. And while I hate to admit it, I also felt a cheap but delicious tingle of smugness, because I now knew that “Neanderthal” wasn’t the insult Hurley thought it was  —   though this, I simultaneously realized, also closed a certain   loop and promoted, in me, the very   elitist glory Hurley was incensed by, thus deepening the divide. It was dizzying and sad and maybe inevitably human, but still no help to us at all.

0 - Thousands of years ago, every lake was like Great Bear Lake. So pure you could lower a cup into the water and drink it. So beautiful that people composed love songs to it. So mysterious that many believed it was alive. Today, of the 10 largest lakes in the world, it is the last one that remains essentially primeval. Great Bear Lake straddles the Arctic Circle in the remote Northwest Territories of Canada. At just over 12, 000 square miles, the lake is the eighth largest in the world. It is bigger than Belgium and deeper than Lake Superior, and it is covered in ice and snow most of the year. The surrounding area is wilderness too  —   a sprawling land of untouched boreal forest and tundra, rivers and mountains. The only human settlement on its shores is the town of Deline, population 503. This isolated community is mostly Sahtuto’ine, meaning the Bear Lake People. They are as connected to the lake as the name implies, and for practical, cultural, historic and even prophetic reasons, they are determined to keep it pristine. Their efforts paid off in 2016. In March, the Great Bear Lake watershed was declared a Unesco Biosphere Reserve. Called the Tsá Tué Biosphere Reserve, it is the largest in North America, and the first in the world to be led by an indigenous community. Several months later, the Canadian government granted Deline   ensuring local control in areas like language and education. It is the first time that an aboriginal government in Canada will represent everyone in the community, aboriginal and nonaboriginal alike. Taken together, the Unesco and   announcements reinforce Deline’s ability to control what happens to Great Bear Lake. David Livingstone, now retired after decades of working on environmental issues for the Canadian government in the far north, helped Deline apply for Unesco designation. To the Sahtuto’ine, Great Bear Lake is “not just a body of water it’s fundamental to their culture,” he said. “The folks in Deline consider the lake to be a living thing. ” Great Bear Lake is important to Mr. Livingstone as well. “It is the last great lake of its size and quality on the planet,” he said. “It’s like the Mona Lisa  —   a world treasure. ” I had spent an hour or two in Deline back in 2014, as an American diplomat posted to Canada. It was July and the lake was   endless and flat to the horizon. During my   tour, it was the sole time I needed a translator, because many Deline elders speak only their own language, North Slavey. This past November, I returned to Deline to learn more about the community’s relationship with the lake, to witness the interplay of culture, language, wilderness and isolation that makes this area so distinct. It was late afternoon when the small plane dipped through a thick,   cloud layer and I saw boreal forest  —   part of a vast biome that stretches across northern North America and Eurasia  —   as far as the eye could see. The plane descended toward a slender strip covered in white, Deline’s single runway. It was a short drive from the airport to the hotel where I was staying, the   Grey Goose Lodge. For such a tiny community, Deline has more tourist infrastructure than I expected, including a small handicrafts store in the hotel and an ambition to welcome the growing number of tourists who travel to Canada’s north for a winter and wilderness experience. The evening I arrived, I met with Morris Neyelle, a member of the new governing council, the K’aowedo Ke, as well as Danny Gaudet, a local businessman who was Deline’s lead negotiator for  . Sworn in on Sept. 1, the new Deline Got’ine Government is responsible for delivering an array of local programs and services. Mr. Neyelle, 65, tall and   switches easily between English and North Slavey. He said   allowed the residents of Deline to preserve their way of life and to use these traditions to tackle modern problems. In the past, Mr. Gaudet added, people would look only to the national and provincial government for help. Now, Deline would decide what was best for its people. This included making their own decisions about economic development, such as elevating cultural tourism through the   Destination Deline program. “Just on tourism alone, we think we can probably put everyone to work in this town,” Mr. Gaudet said. Protecting the lake, however, is not just about   and increased tourism. For the Sahtuto’ine, Mr. Neyelle and Mr. Gaudet explained, the lake was a powerful force in the world: a place critical to the survival of the human species. This belief is based on the prophecies of a Sahtuto’ine elder named Eht’se Ayah, who died in 1940. Some believe Mr. Ayah’s prophecies are literal, others believe they are allegory. Mr. Ayah foretold that in the future, people from the south would come to Great Bear Lake because it would be one of the few places left with water to drink and fish to eat. He said so many boats would come that you could walk from one to another without entering the water. Simply put, Great Bear Lake would be a last refuge for humanity. Mr. Gaudet said the predictions were a big reason the new government pushed to have authority over everyone in the area, aboriginal and nonaboriginal alike. If “hundreds of thousands of people” come because of the prophecies and because “we have the freshest water in the world,” he said, then “you have to live under our rules. ” People in Deline told me that the weather had been changing in recent years, and that the summer season was getting longer. The lake is taking longer to freeze, and it’s melting earlier. Mr. Neyelle said climate change added a note of urgency to the prophecies they may come true sooner than expected. “Maybe we’re in that era now where everything is changing,” he said, and people from the south “are going to come. ” Late that evening, I walked along Deline’s main street and tried to imagine hundreds of thousands of people coming to the area. It was hard to do. The night sky was overcast, and the temperature had dipped to minus 10 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 23 Celsius). Specks of ice from the   of Great Bear Lake filled the air. The flecks caused outdoor lights to reflect upward, creating optical illusions called light pillars that made it seem as if each light had become a searchlight aimed at the sky. I walked off the road and into a thicket of boreal forest. Hoarfrost from the lake clung to every surface of the trees and bushes. It covered even the undersides of spruce needles. I was hundreds of feet from the shoreline, yet Great Bear Lake was everywhere  —   in the air, on the ground and in the trees. At 8 the next morning, I awoke to darkness. From November until January, Deline gets less than five hours of sun each day, although it makes up for that between May and July, when it gets over 22 hours daily. Eventually, I saw a glimmer of predawn on the horizon, but it was not until 10:30 a. m. that the first rays of sun peeked out. I walked outside and headed toward the church for Sunday Mass. The round,   structure was in town, on the shore of Great Bear Lake. Chunks and shards of ice lay heaped on the shoreline, while farther out, the surface of the lake was   alternately skimmed white with snow or glistening with ice that froze overnight. A wedge of open water was visible just offshore. It looked turbulent, straining and frothing where it encountered the surface ice, as if it were determined not to freeze. Deline is predominantly Roman Catholic. Inside the church, I witnessed the community’s focus on preserving North Slavey. An elder was leading the congregation in the rosary. His call was in North Slavey, and the response was in a mix of Slavey and English. During the Mass, the Gospel and the homily were in English, followed by an    translation into North Slavey. The language is spoken everywhere  —   in church, on the streets and at home  —   as part of a concerted effort to keep it alive. The 2011 Canadian census counted only 225 people who identified the language as their mother tongue. But North Slavey is an official language of the Deline Got’ine Government and of the Northwest Territories. For the moment, North Slavey is not on the verge of extinction. It belongs to a family of North American indigenous languages that includes Apache and Navajo. Children in Deline’s primary school are taught the language this year, an elder began to teach North Slavey to high school students. Mr. Neyelle said the new government wanted to make acquiring and passing on the language a priority because it believed speaking North Slavey was crucial to preserving the culture. “Slavey is ours,” he said. “That’s where our powers lay. ” He said his descriptions in Slavey had more depth and color than those in English, even though he was fluent in both. Teenagers I spoke to echoed this thought. They said jokes were funnier in Slavey. After Mass, I walked over to Great Bear Lake, curious about the little skein of open water I had seen hours earlier. To my surprise, it had disappeared. Thinking I was turned around, I kept searching, but saw only the reflective surface of new ice and beyond that, a large field of older,   ice. Mr. Neyelle confirmed that the water had frozen over during the time I was in church. He was not surprised it had happened so quickly. Sometimes, he said, you could actually see ice creeping across open water. His description made it seem like a fox or wolf stalking its prey. We drove to Ski Hill, a gathering place for the community perched on top of a cleared rise near town. The sun had been up for three hours, but already it was getting dark. Several pickup trucks were parked close together, next to a recently built hut with a blazing fire pit in the middle. Children were sledding (despite the name of the hill, no one actually skis there) and some of the adults were   a new snowmobile with a powerful engine. Strips of lake trout along with moose meat and hot dogs cooked on top of barrel grills. The atmosphere was festive, perhaps because it seemed as if Great Bear Lake was finally freezing over. This meant access to the entire lake, better fishing and, eventually, an ice road that would temporarily connect Deline to the outside world. Or perhaps it was festive because these were friends gathering on a Sunday to enjoy the sunset, grilled food and conversation in North Slavey and in English. It reminded me that despite the groundbreaking nature of Deline’s   and Unesco status, it was still a small town. The type of town where the phone directory is a piece of paper taped to the wall. One elder I met there was Charlie Neyelle, 72, Morris Neyelle’s older brother and the elders’ representative on the K’aowedo Ke. Charlie Neyelle is a spiritual and mental health guide for the community, and pushed for   and preservation of Great Bear Lake. I asked him a question I had posed to many people during my time in Deline: What does Great Bear Lake mean to you? In response, Mr. Neyelle told me the   story, about a Sahtuto’ine ancestor who lived around Great Bear Lake, in an area called Caribou Point. One day the fisherman set out four hooks. When the fisherman returned to check on them, a lake trout had broken one of the lines and taken the hook. This bothered the fisherman, because in those days, hooks were extremely valuable. So that night, he transformed himself into a losch, also known as burbot, a freshwater version of cod. The fisherman swam down to the middle of the lake to look for the hook and heard a booming sound. There, at the bottom, he saw a gigantic beating heart. All the species of fish  —   trout, whitefish, pickerel, herring, suckers  —   faced the heart, surrounding and protecting it. He swam back to shore after seeing this, and the following morning when he went to check on his three hooks, he found three trout. One of them had the hook he had lost the day before dangling from its mouth. When the fisherman saw the   he realized Great Bear Lake was alive, Mr. Neyelle said. “The lake gives life to the universal: grass, insects, willow, everything. ” Some in Deline believe that the   at the bottom of the lake gives life to all of the lakes, oceans and rivers in the world. For the Sahtuto’ine, this belief underscores not only why Great Bear Lake must be protected, but also why its protection is of global importance. Toward the end of our conversation, Mr. Neyelle also mentioned Eht’se Ayah’s prophecy. “When there is no food or water all around the world, many will come to Great Bear Lake,” he said. “It will be one of the last places that has both. ” No matter how many times I heard this apocalyptic prediction, it was jarring to hear, especially when inserted into conversations about Great Bear Lake’s beauty and providence. The regular evocation of this prophecy reminded me of what happened on the other side of the lake in the 1940s, in Port Radium. The site of a large uranium ore mine, it was the most significant industrial development in Great Bear Lake’s history. During World War II, uranium from Port Radium was sent to the United States for the war effort, where it provided much of the material for the Manhattan Project and the atomic bombs that fell on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Although it stopped producing uranium in 1960 and is now abandoned, Port Radium was at its peak larger than Deline. Irene Kodakin was born near Port Radium in 1952, when the mine was still in operation. Now living in Deline, she describes Port Radium as a thriving community of aboriginal and nonaboriginal workers brought to work in the mines. Ms. Kodakin has happy memories of her childhood, in stark contrast to her experience in a residential school in Inuvik, a town more than 400 miles away. For much of the 20th century, the Canadian government forced many aboriginal children into these schools, with the goal of assimilating them into Canadian culture. “They would put their hand in our mouths and just press our bottom lips to our teeth until it bleeds” if you speak Slavey, she said. When she returned home, she could no longer speak North Slavey. Her older sister had to translate when Ms. Kodakin spoke to her own father. A generation of Sahtuto’ine lived and worked at Port Radium. Although it was known at the time that exposure to uranium was dangerous, this warning did not reach them. Long after the mine closed, Sahtuto’ine who had been in Port Radium began to die of various cancers. Ms. Kodakin’s father, George Kodakin, who had become a respected    chief in Deline, died of cancer at age 64. Ms. Kodakin’s older sister, aunts and uncles also died of it, and she believes the mine was the cause. Ms. Kodakin’s belief is shared by many in the community, including Gina Beyha, a coordinator for the Unesco Biosphere Reserve who was a nurse in Deline for 15 years. While researching links between cancer and Port Radium, Ms. Beyha and others discovered that uranium taken from the sacred Great Bear Lake was most likely used in the bombs that detonated over Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Many people, especially the elders, were aghast, Ms. Beyha said. In 1998, Deline sent a delegation to Japan for the annual Hiroshima Peace Memorial Ceremony. It was a gesture of atonement as well as a way to start healing, particularly for the widows of men who had worked at Port Radium, who made traditional gifts that the delegation presented to the Japanese. During my time in Deline, the legacies of Port Radium and the residential schools were among many reasons people gave for protecting Great Bear Lake and for negotiating  . The others: to preserve Sahtuto’ine culture, to develop tourism, to honor elders and ancestors, and to prepare for the realization of Eht’se Ayah’s prophecies. After a week of talking with many Deline residents, these reasons all seemed tightly connected and at the core of the community’s identity. Those not living on Great Bear Lake, however, gave another reason that was perhaps the simplest of all. The lake, like the Mona Lisa, is magnificent. It draws the gaze as an ocean does. The slate blue ice and white snow merge seamlessly into the sky so that when you leave the shoreline, with brittle tiles of ice cracking underfoot, it feels like stepping into a cloud. And in the brief moments when the wind dies down, the silence is as deep and enormous as the lake itself. During my last days in the area, I went exploring with a Deline resident, Leeroy Andre, his wife, Diane, and his    daughter, Whitney. We would leave at sunrise and plunge into the boreal forest, following trails and old seismic lines. In the distance lay the frozen sheet of Great Bear Lake, and beyond, thick rolls of mist rose toward the sun, evidence of open water at the edge of the horizon. In North Slavey, this mist is called  . It is a land of ptarmigan and marten, musk ox, caribou, moose, wolf and bear. One day, after we had been out four hours, we came across a huge abandoned beaver lodge at least six feet high and twice as long. Around then, despite my wearing several layers, a parka and other gear, the cold started after me. It crept up from the ground onto my snowmobile. It cracked the rubber of my boots and shouldered inside. If I concentrated, I could feel ice crystals forming in my toes. When we started moving again, the cold took on the shape of a blanket and patiently tried to cover my shoulders and back. At sunset, the moon appeared like a slender comma above the trees, glowing in the   sky. We drove through marshmallow mounds: berry bushes covered in snow and hoarfrost for most of the year before they emerge in the summer and grow leaves and berries as fast as they can. Dark came quickly, and we sped across yet another small lake connected to Great Bear Lake. The snowmobile’s headlight illuminated a blizzard of snowflakes as shiny as diamonds, as if the land were showing what true wealth looked like. The northern lights appeared like a hallucination across the   sky. For hours they moved in slow motion above me, as the land seemed to recede and I faced the cosmos. If a recent scientific theory proves correct, somewhere out in space is the origin of the earth’s water, which fills Great Bear Lake and gives us life. This connected with something I was told when I first arrived in Deline. To the Sahtuto’ine, Great Bear Lake is not just a lake. They are part of it and it is part of them. No longer does this seem like a belief unique to their culture  —   it sounds like a universal truth. The water from Great Bear Lake flows in our veins, too.

0 - • Hundreds of thousands of women gathered in Washington on Saturday in a kind of counterinauguration after President Trump took office on Friday. A range of speakers and performers cutting across generational lines rallied near the Capitol before marchers made their way toward the White House. • They were joined by crowds in cities across the country: In Chicago, the size of a rally so quickly outgrew early estimates that the march that was to follow was canceled for safety. In Manhattan, Fifth Avenue became a river of pink hats, while in downtown Los Angeles, even before the gathering crowd stretched itself out to march, it was more than a quarter mile deep on several streets. • Begun as a Facebook post just after the election, the march is the start of what organizers hope could be a sustained campaign of protest in a polarized America, unifying demonstrators around issues like reproductive rights, immigration and civil rights. The movement has also encountered divisions. • The Times had journalists covering the marches in Washington New York Boston Atlanta Denver Los Angeles Phoenix St. Paul and Key West, Fla. Check out what they posted on Twitter and what readers asked of them live. See photos from marches around the world, too. (All times listed below are local.) (Or watch video of the whole event.) • The singer and actress Janelle Monae highlighted the issue of police violence, leading the crowd in a chant of “Sandra Bland! Say her name!” a reference to the   case where a black woman died in police custody in Texas after being arrested in 2015. She then brought the microphone to each of the women in “Mothers of the Movement” who had joined her onstage. One by one, they joined in the chant, each inserting the name of her child who had died at the hands of the police. • The actress Ashley Judd delivered an uninhibited speech that ended with her referencing how Mr. Trump bragged, in a 2005 recording, that he could use his celebrity status to force himself on women, even groping their private parts. They “ain’t for grabbing,” she said. “They are for birthing new generations of filthy, vulgar, nasty, proud, Christian, Muslim, Buddhist, Sikh, you name it, for new generations of nasty women. ” • Gloria Steinem, the feminist icon of the 1960s and 1970s, told the women in the group to get to know one another more personally. “Make sure you introduce yourselves to each other and decide what we’re going to do tomorrow, and tomorrow and tomorrow,” she said. “We’re never turning back!” • “It’s been a   time to be both a woman and an immigrant in this country,” said the actress and activist America Ferrera. “But the president is not America. His cabinet is not America. Congress is not America. We are America! And we are here to stay. ” • After getting to the crowd to repeat a number to call Congress, the filmmaker Michael Moore urged people to run for office: “This is not the time for shy people! Shy people, you have two hours to get over it. ” • The actress Scarlett Johansson told a story about how she had visited a Planned Parenthood clinic in New York City after starting her acting career, and how a doctor there had treated her with compassion, “no judgment, no questions asked. ” “I feel that in the face of this current political climate, it is vital that we all make it our mission to get really, really personal,” she said. “President Trump, I did not vote for you,” she continued. “I want to be able to support you. But first I ask that you support me. Support my sister. Support my mother. Support my best friend and all of our girlfriends. ” Otherwise, Ms. Johansson said, her own daughter, “may potentially not have the right to make choices for her body and her future that your daughter Ivanka has been privileged to have. ” _____ Many participants believed that Mr. Trump expressed misogynistic views during the presidential campaign, with remarks about Megyn Kelly, Carly Fiorina and Hillary Clinton. After the 2005 recording surfaced, several women came forward to accuse Mr. Trump of inappropriate sexual conduct. He dismissed the recording as “locker room banter” and assailed his accusers. In a sly allusion to the crude remarks Mr. Trump made in the recording, many marchers, men and women alike, wore pink “pussyhats,” complete with cat ears. The hats are described on pussyhatproject. com as a way to “make a unique collective visual statement which will help activists be better heard. ” _____ Just after 10 a. m. Mr. Trump and his family headed in the opposite direction of the march in Washington for the National Prayer Service, an inaugural tradition, at the National Cathedral. When he spoke at C. I. A. headquarters in Langley, Va. in the midafternoon, he told his audience that they were his “No. 1 stop” on his first full day in office, because they were “really special amazing people. ” He also ruminated about how big the attendance had been at his inaugural speech, but he did not mention the large crowds of the women’s march, where demonstrators were challenging his administration on a number of policies, or even that the march was taking place as he was speaking. _____ Mrs. Clinton was not expected to attend the march in Washington, The Times reported on Friday, but her Twitter account sent a midmorning note anyway. _____ In a speech in Boston, Ms. Warren, a Democratic senator from Massachusetts, said fundamental freedoms, like abortion rights and gay marriage, could be at stake under Mr. Trump’s Supreme Court. “We can whimper, we can whine or we can fight back,” she said, as demonstrators in pink hats waved American flags. “Me, I’m here to fight back. ” “We believe in science,” Ms. Warren said, adding, “we know that climate change is real. ” A police officer patrolling the rally pumped his fists in agreement. “We also believe that immigration makes this country a stronger country,” Ms. Warren said. “We will not build a stupid wall and we will not tear millions of families apart. ” “You know, I could do this all day,” she added, to laughs and cheers. “But we gotta march. ” Jess Bidgood _____ Notable Signs: “Bend toward justice,” evokeing the work of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. “I’m ready to march again,” said Mr. Lewis, a Democratic representative of Georgia, who chaired the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee in the 1960s. “I’ve come here to say to you: Don’t let anybody, anybody, turn you around. ” Citing the demonstrations across the country, Mr. Lewis urged marchers, who flowed onto the street running near the Center for Civil and Human Rights, to “use this unity to organize” future political efforts. ”The next election, we must get out and vote like we never, ever voted before,” said Mr. Lewis, who was embroiled in a public clash with Mr. Trump recently. Alan Blinder _____ The crowds appeared to be huge in most places, with marchers in Washington, New York City and Chicago seeming to stretch to the horizons. Police departments, at times, decline to provide crowd estimates, and crowds are notoriously hard to estimate, even with a good satellite image. But some official and unofficial estimates have given a sense of the turnout. Attendance in New York City was more than 400, 000, according to Mayor Bill de Blasio’s office. The St. Paul police issued an official crowd count of 50, 000 to 60, 000 people. Attendance in Boston was 175, 000, according to Nicole Caravella, a spokeswoman for Mayor Martin J. Walsh. The Atlanta Police Department estimated about 60, 000 people attended a rally there. The Department of Public Safety in Phoenix estimated that some 20, 000 marched, while in Key West, Fla. a town of 25, 000, police said more than 2, 000 people marched. Organizers in Chicago estimated the crowd there at 250, 000, the Chicago Tribune said. The Office of Emergency Management and Communications there said late on Saturday morning that Grant Park, the sprawling area where the   had gathered, had been filled to capacity. Though the official march was canceled, many still chose to walk through downtown holding protest signs. Although the mayor’s office in Washington and organizers declined to provide an estimate of the size of the flagship march, The Associated Press reported that the District of Columbia’s homeland security director, Christopher Geldart, said it was safe to say the crowd at the march there was more than the 500, 000 that organizers told city officials to expect. “The crowd was so heavy, we didn’t know which way to go,” said Sabitha   a psychotherapist who traveled to Washington from Philadelphia with her    child, Sanji, and a friend, Pallavi Sreedhar. “We were squeezed, touching. ” (March organizers offered a worldwide tally for the 673 “sister” marches, but when asked, could not provide an explanation of how the tally had been calculated.) _____ Overheard Chant: “Yes we can” as people walked past the White House. As the sun set downtown, protesters made their way to the White House and assembled in small groups in a park just across from the building’s entrance. There in an area surrounded by temporary gates, people walked single file through one open entrance and one by one laid protest signs across gates set up for inauguration several hundred feet away from the White House. While the temporary gates made walking up to the building impossible, people stood shaking their heads in frustration. Fontella Garraway, a    retired Army veteran who drove three and half hours from her home in Rocky Mount, N. C. sat on a bench staring at the White House with a pin that read “girl power. ” “Even looking at the White House, it’s like I hope he’s looking out here at us,” she said of Mr. Trump. “I hope it’s penetrating to him that we mean business and we are serious. ” Moments later she lay a handwritten sign that read “Love trumps hate Hear our voice,” on the a fence facing the White House. ”That’s his inauguration gift,” she said. Yamiche Alcindor _____ Notable Chant: “Tell me what America looks like! This is what America looks like. ” Notable Sash: “65, 855, 610 votes for a woman,” worn by Sara Powell, 61, of Phoenix, and nine of her friends. Overheard: “My arms are tired. This is a good workout,” said Rima Borgogni, 50, owner of a Pilates studio in Sedona, Ariz. after holding a sign throughout the   march. Ellen Ferreira and her friends felt as if they were fighting for some of the same things they used to. They are mostly retired and many of them are veterans of past protests, including the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom in 1963, when Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. delivered his “I Have a Dream” speech. “For our right to choose,” said Piya Jacob, 70, a retired elementary school principal. “For equality,” said Mary Helsaple, 67, an artist. “For healing justice,” said Gretchen Vorbeck, 72, who runs a nonprofit that buys grocery gift cards for public schoolteachers. Carol Decker, 70, a retired magazine publisher, jumped in and said, “We’re mad as hell and we’re not going to take it anymore. ” Fernanda Santos _____ Notable Chants: “We are the popular vote!” Notable Shirt: A blue shirt with “Make Sexism Wrong Again” in the same style as “Make America Great Again” campaign shirts. Just off 15th street, a block north of the parade’s official end point, a large flatbed float with big “TRUMP” letters arched along the back parked itself in the middle of the street, drawing the ire of the thousands of marchers, who berated the float with chants of “Shame!” and “We are the popular vote!” Police officers formed a barricade around the float with more than a   sidecar motorcycles. The six or so men and one woman on the float all took pictures of the protesters. Yet some of those who chanted to chase the float away weren’t surprised at its appearance at their march. “I mean the inauguration was yesterday,” said Chrissy Fiore, 39, of Washington, though she said it was “crazy that they made it down here and that now they’re getting police escorted out. ” Officers wouldn’t let reporters approach those on the float or those driving it, but a magnet on the side said “Trump Unity Bridge. ” As the float headed east to move away from the parade, Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. of Milwaukee County, a Trump supporter, was seen walking along the sidewalk, taking in the scene but remaining silent. He did not respond to a reporter’s question about his opinion of the march or protest. Nick Corasaniti _____ Chant: “Don’t take away our ACA” and “Who’s the boss? We are!” Notable Signs: “Show us your taxes” “you can’t comb over sexism” “1459 days” and “build a bridge not a wall. ” Overheard: One woman speaking at the rally told the story of having an abortion when she was young, making the minimum wage and could not support a child. She said she was fighting for equal pay “not just for white women. ” At the rally in Mr. Trump’s hometown near Trump World Tower, elected officials and celebrities assailed the president. Signs in the crowd mocked his bouffant hair and the size of his hands. The actress Whoopi Goldberg said it would be the first of many protests against the president. “This is how people ended the war in Vietnam,” Ms. Goldberg told the cheering crowd. Grace Huezo, 20, a student at Hunter College, marched with her twin sister holding a “Nasty Woman” sign. She said she was there to defend women’s rights after she was appalled by Mr. Trump’s comments about grabbing women. “We’re here saying, no, people do not have permission to grab women without our permission,” she said. She said she was buoyed by the huge turnout and the camaraderie. “I’m hopeful to see so many people that are not giving up and they’re keeping their spirit,” she said. “We’re all just going to stick together over the next four years. ” Emma G. Fitzsimmons _____ Popular chant: “March! March! March!” Notable signs: “I won’t stop til it rains glass” “You can’t comb over misogyny” (accompanied by a drawing of Mr. Trump’s hair) “Flunk the Electoral College. ” Overheard: “I got to bring my high school punk rock out,” said Emily Hastings, 39, a woman from Denver wearing a black “eat the rich”   and carrying a “Don’t tread on women” sign. “Punk rock is all about resistance. ” The march began in a park at the center of the city with a group singing “You’ve got a friend. ” Marchers blanketed the park nestled between the   state capitol and city hall, hauling strollers, wearing pink hats and often hugging and kissing. Julie Turkewitz _____ Notable Sign: “Make America Compassionate Again,” and “I Love You” Thousands of demonstrators gathered on a drizzly morning clad in rain boots, ponchos and pink knit “pussyhats” to march to the Capitol. “What Trump has said is so based on exclusion and winning and being right versus taking care of everyone,” said Hilary James, 27, a musician from Minneapolis. “Even if he doesn’t listen to us, I feel it’s important to not sit back. ” Christina Capecchi _____ Notable Sign: Make America Think Again Gloria Cole, 66, had turned the protest into a family affair, traveling here with her wife, her daughter, her daughter’s boyfriend, and her brother and   . “I drew a line, it’s like, I’m an old woman  —   I’m not that old, I’m 66  —   I have to stand up for equal rights for everyone, for human rights,” Ms. Cole said. “We’re here, and we’re not going away. ” Aili Shaw, 14, held a white sign that read, “Our arms are tired from holding these signs since the 1920s. ” Ms. Shaw had traveled here, by train and car, with friends from her home in Coventry, R. I. “Women don’t have the rights they should,” she said. Jess Bidgood _____ Popular Chant: “Thank You. ” Women were chanting this to the organizers of the march as they kicked off the day’s events. Notable Clothing: At the corner of C and Third Southwest, many women (and some men) were wearing   “pussyhats” of all shades of pink. Organizers wanted to knit as many as one million hats for this event. People were also getting creative with the signs they carry. Alan and Alison Lewis drove in from Astoria with their    Grace. “You shouldn’t have to have a relationship to a woman to stand up for women,” Mr. Lewis said. “Equality and justice is enough of a reason to be here. ” Katie Rogers _____ Who She Is: Jessica Coleman, 56, of Stone Mountain, Ga. Backstory: A black retired teacher who used to show her daughter documentaries about black history and march with her daughter and church members during Martin Luther King holiday weekends. “I wanted them to know you can be a smart, intelligent black person. You don’t have to sag your pants and follow certain things that became media culture. I wanted them to know that people marched, bled and died for us to be able to vote and be able to go to college and have certain jobs. ” “You can really lose your sense of self if you don’t know where you’ve come from and you don’t have a vision of where you want to go. ” _____ Who She Is: Amber   34, of Bethesda, Md. is Ms. Coleman’s daughter Backstory: Works at a nonprofit focused on civic education “On the evening of election night, after saying, ‘Hey, I’m going to vote and I’m going to get my friends to vote,’ I sat on the sofa bawling trying to figure out what to say to my daughters the next morning because they went to bed certain that Hillary was going to win. ” “Marching is my way of putting my money where my mouth is as far as being an active citizen. ” “I want my daughters to have agency and have control over their bodies and feel comfortable in the country that they are in so this is my way of saying, ‘Hey everybody, I agree with all the people who are out here for different reasons and we don’t agree with what is happening right now and we are taking a stand. ’” _____ Who She Is: Garvey Mortley, 8, of Bethesda, Md. is Ms. Coleman’s granddaughter Backstory: Third grader was named after Marcus Garvey “I think it’s good to share the moment with them and help protest Donald Trump because we want to stand up for our rights because a long time ago, lots of women could not vote. Now we can vote and protest people and stuff. ” “If he affects the world in a bad way  —   like I have lots of friends from different countries and he could make them all move away   …     that makes me mad because all the people from the civil rights movement had a hard time trying to put us together. It’s like a puzzle, all these people came together, piece by piece, and now Donald Trump is coming over and just breaking those puzzle pieces. ”

0 - When Indira Islas was in third grade at Centennial Arts Academy, a public elementary school in Gainesville, Ga. she decided it was time to get serious. It was 2006, and she was in the lowest reading group in her class. She had been in that group since arriving two years earlier, speaking no English, in Gainesville, a city of 38, 000 just northeast of Atlanta’s booming outer suburbs. But being at the bottom went against everything she believed about herself. “I wanted to be with the smart kids,” she recalls. Starting the year before, in second grade, she read every volume of the “Magic Tree House” books in her   library, a series about two ordinary siblings who climb into their backyard treehouse and   to Pompeii, the Wild West, the ice age, feudal Japan and beyond. “I absolutely loved them,” she says. “It was like going on adventures all over the world. ” It was also the opposite of her own life. Indira left Mexico for the United States at age 6 with her parents and two younger sisters. Her mother cleaned houses when she wasn’t caring for the children  —   there would eventually be seven of them  —   and her father worked in construction, and there was no money for   lessons or soccer clubs, let alone traveling. “I’d hear about trips and experiences of my white friends, and I remember thinking: I’ll never go to the beach or Disney World for spring break,” Indira says. Her parents told her that education was all that mattered, and she had to spend all her free time inside, reading and writing. “I tell my children this country is a blessing to all the people living here,” her mother told me. “If you have the opportunity to be good, it’s very important to take it. ” Indira took this advice to heart. By the time she was in fifth grade, her reading skills had improved so much that she tested into the top reading group. By middle school, she consistently got A’s, which qualified her for a celebratory school trip every time report cards came out. “They rewarded us by taking us skating or bowling,” she says. “I felt like I was so smart, just getting the chance to go out for the whole school day with friends. That’s when I said: ‘I can make it. ’’u2009” Indira began to throw herself into everything. At recess, she played soccer and basketball, competing so fiercely that everyone took notice. Boys usually picked other boys for their teams, and white kids tended to favor other white kids. But everyone started picking Indira. In middle school, she was on the track team, running   races. Her coach was stunned by her determination. In meets, even when she won her event, she scolded herself unless she broke her previous record. After practices ended, she would keep running. “I wanted to think,” she says. “I’d stay after practice and run and run and run. ” Indira remembers understanding vaguely that it wasn’t just poverty that set her and her family apart. Her parents had been doctors in Mexico. She admired pictures in their dresser drawer of the two of them in their 20s standing together, tall and proud in their white coats  —   before they all fled the violence of drug gangs who were then taking over their home state, Guerrero. When she asked her parents why they were no longer doctors, they explained it was because they were not American citizens. It didn’t make sense to Indira. Why would her father have shed that beautiful crisp white coat for the fraying pants and shirts he now wore? Soon after Indira turned 13, in 2011, she was riding home from track practice with her mother when another car sideswiped the family’s Ford Expedition. The other driver, who was at fault, insisted on calling the police, according to Indira and a lawyer who assisted the family. Indira pleaded not to involve the police, explaining that her mother did not have a driver’s license because she was not an American citizen. (In Georgia and most other states, undocumented immigrants cannot obtain driver’s licenses.) But the driver said she needed a police report to get insurance to cover the damage to her car. A police officer arrived and asked for Indira’s mother’s license. When she said she did not have one  —   a state crime  —   she was told to get out of the car. Indira got out, too. She remembers two of her younger siblings sleeping in the back, one in a booster seat, one in a car seat. Two elders from the church they attended arrived to ask for mercy. She has seven children, they told the officer. He responded that he was simply enforcing the law. Indira’s mother turned to her and began to cry. “Indira, I don’t know what is going to happen,” she said. “They’re going to take me. ” Indira remembers remaining strangely calm. “When she was being handcuffed, I said: ‘Mom, everything is going to be O. K.’’u2009” Indira’s mother was held in Gainesville’s Hall County jail for three days, but that wasn’t the most frightening part for the family. Hall is one of four counties in Georgia that have a formal agreement to report arrests of undocumented immigrants to the Department of Homeland Security, which means that infractions as minor as a   bulb above a license plate can spiral into deportation proceedings. Indira’s mother says that her charge of driving without a license ultimately led to a referral to immigration court and a deportation order instructing her to leave the country within 30 days. She stayed, slipping into the shadows. Every day since, Indira says, she and her siblings have feared that their mother would be deported. It would take only one more traffic stop. “That woke me up,” Indira says. “Until then, I thought the world was happy. ” In fact, she now realized, it was only American citizens who seemed truly happy. “It must feel pretty good, I guess, to not have to worry about whether your family could be taken away any day. ” Indira has wanted to be a doctor for almost as long as she can remember. When she was 10, her family was shopping for groceries at Sam’s Club, and she spotted a large book about human anatomy. She became so excited about it that her parents bought it for her birthday, even though it was well above her reading level  —   and their price range. She began working her way through it, mesmerized, and when she got stuck, her mother would explain whatever had stumped her. She was determined to go to college and medical school and fulfill her parents’ interrupted dream. In her junior year, Indira began researching college options. She would be a strong applicant. She was consistently at or near the top of her class she was on the   track and soccer teams she volunteered over 1, 000 hours a year at the local hospital, a record in the history of the   program and she led her school’s chapter of the Hispanic Organization Promoting Education (HOPE) which encouraged Latino students  —   who made up just over half the district’s population  —   to stay in school and graduate. She was distressed to discover that Georgia barred undocumented immigrants from attending its top public universities and charged them    tuition at all others  —   triple the rate for citizen residents. She then turned to researching financial aid and learned that Congress barred her from accessing federal Pell grants, loans, scholarships and   jobs  —   the most common forms of assistance for   students. At first, she greeted this as just another set of obstacles to surmount, but as time went on, she began to despair. She would retreat to the classroom of her science teacher, Teresa Leach, who had become her mentor, in need of encouragement. “There were a couple of times when I just cried to her because I was tired,” she said. “I questioned myself if it was all worth the effort. ” All the while, Indira told me, she held onto her religious conviction that God had a plan, and that she must respect it. At a college fair attended by representatives of numerous Georgia colleges, she asked admissions officers what kind of help was available for undocumented students. No one had any to offer her. She switched her focus to private colleges and was admitted to Atlanta’s Agnes Scott, which she says awarded her $20, 000 annually in financial aid, less than half of what she needed. She researched   private scholarships and found two for undocumented students, but she was selected for neither. She was awarded seven small scholarships, which totaled $10, 000, enough to go to a nearby public commuter college for only one semester at the    tuition rate. Last May, Indira attended her graduation ceremony at Gainesville High School, but she had nowhere to go next. In every picture from that day, she wears a wide smile, but she was in pain inside, particularly when she caught a glimpse of her mother in the crowd, looking distraught. Unable to bring herself to celebrate with friends, she went home to be with her family. Days later, a friend told her about a philanthropic organization called TheDream. US, which was offering undocumented students full   scholarships to Delaware State University or Eastern Connecticut State University. The application was demanding, and only 76 students would be chosen. She poured herself into the essays, spending hours composing them alongside an English teacher, Cindy Lloyd. She applied to Delaware State, a historically black college in Dover, five hours closer to home than Eastern Connecticut. In late June, she received an email from TheDream. US. “I saw ‘Congratulations,’’u2009” she remembers, “and I read no more. ” In late August, Indira made the   drive with her parents from Gainesville to Delaware State in unusual silence. She was thinking hard about each of her six younger siblings, wondering how they would fare without her. Over breakfast at a Cracker Barrel in South Carolina, when her mother pressed her about how she was feeling, she talked only of her concerns about not being at home to help everyone. When she arrived on campus  —   a flat expanse of grassy courtyards and buildings amid strip malls, auto dealers and chain restaurants just beyond Dover’s historic capital area  —   she found 33 other “opportunity scholars,” just as worried and hopeful as she was. All of them were assigned to a dorm about a quarter of a mile from the D. S. U. campus, a former Sheraton hotel acquired a few years earlier by the university as part of an expansion. They bonded instantly, traveling as a posse from classes to the library to the cafeteria, often ending up together late at night in the dorm lobby or in a lounge that had been a large hotel suite on the second floor. In their first month on campus, the opportunity scholars were invited to a welcoming ceremony in the school’s Martin Luther King Jr. Student Center with Gov. Jack Markell the Democratic senator Tom Carper Donald Graham, a founder of TheDream. US and D. S. U. ’s president, Harry Williams. “This is not just an opportunity for you it is an opportunity for the state of Delaware,” Markell told them. “It is sad to see your own home state reject such talent and potential. ” He pronounced himself “thrilled that you’re here. ” It was the first time many of the students could recall being welcomed anywhere. “We felt rejection our whole lives from our own states,” Indira said. “We were here only three weeks, and we already met the governor and the senator. It felt like saying ‘Haha!’ to Georgia. ” Of the 34 opportunity scholars enrolled at D. S. U. 28 are from Mexico and one each is from Ecuador, El Salvador, Peru, Gabon, Gambia and Trinidad and Tobago. Their families are a composite portrait of the economic forces that have drawn undocumented immigrants to the nation’s small towns and metropolitan heartland. Their parents work in poultry plants, on factory lines, in warehouses, on construction sites, in restaurants they clean and paint houses and schools, tend gardens. “They make everything look perfect for the tourists,” Yulma Lopez, who left Mexico at age 3, said of her parents’ work for a landscaping company in Charleston, S. C. Almost all their parents work illegally, but many pay income taxes, having obtained federal   numbers. And some, including Indira’s father, have secured temporary federal permission to work and drive lawfully. While most of the students are 18 or 19, typical for college freshmen, some have worked for years in hopes of one day saving enough for college. Olivia Bekale, who is 27 and grew up in Baton Rouge, arrived in Louisiana from Gabon as a child. She graduated from high school in 2008 with a 3. 9 G. P. A. from the Louisiana School for Math, Science and the Arts, a prestigious   boarding school for top achievers. Unable to afford college, she cycled from one   position to the next  —   server at the Melting Pot, a fondue restaurant retail sales consultant for Sprint   agent for Marriott pharmacy tech for Walgreens. Olivia, who had wanted to be a doctor since an aunt died of AIDS when she was 5, had been out of high school for eight years when she learned of the opportunity scholarship she applied immediately. All but one of the students were enrolled in the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, also known as DACA. Created in 2012 by an   executive action, DACA allowed teenagers and young adults who came to the United States illegally as children with their parents to register with the government and in turn receive a   renewable protection against deportation, along with work permits and Social Security numbers. Most of the students, like Indira, signed up at age 15, as soon as they were eligible. With DACA, Indira, who is now 18, was able to get a driver’s license and a job at a Publix supermarket when she was in high school, working 20 hours a week as a cashier and bagger. Being able to work and drive legally, free of the fears her mother faced, and fitting in with her classmates, Indira says, was “living the American dream. ” With her income from Publix, she even was able to get braces for her teeth. The starting point for all of their dreams was education, and the quest for it has been central to the experience of undocumented young people since long before Indira and her classmates were born. In the late 1970s, when undocumented immigrants had yet to move in large numbers beyond border states, Texas passed a law authorizing local school districts to ban them from public schools or charge them tuition. In a landmark decision in Plyler v. Doe in 1982, a narrowly divided Supreme Court struck down the law, finding that undocumented children had a constitutional right to free    public education. The opinion blamed a dysfunctional immigration system for creating the crisis by failing to keep out undocumented immigrants or provide them a path to citizenship. “Already disadvantaged as a result of poverty, lack of   ability and undeniable racial prejudices, these children, without an education, will become permanently locked into the lowest socioeconomic class,” Justice William Brennan wrote for the majority, quoting the   opinion. The case also introduced the argument that undocumented children were legally blameless, unlike their parents: “The classification at issue deprives a group of children of the opportunity for education afforded all other children simply because they have been assigned a legal status due to a violation of law by their parents,” Justice Lewis Powell wrote in a concurring opinion. Undocumented children poured into the nation’s schools over the next generation, and as they reached college age, they coalesced into a movement, advocating access to higher education as well as full citizenship. In 2001, they began calling themselves Dreamers, now an estimated 2. 1 million young immigrants who have grown up as Americans in almost every way except for their passports. The name came from the Dream Act (Development, Relief and Education for Alien Minors) introduced in Congress in 2001 by Senator Richard Durbin, a Democrat from Illinois, and Senator Orrin Hatch, a Republican from Utah, and for which activists fought for over a decade. The measure, which would have put undocumented children on a path to citizenship, never passed, but the vast network of Dreamers became a compelling political force. In 2001, hundreds of them turned out to testify in Texas in favor of legislation to allow undocumented residents to pay   college tuition if they graduated from Texas high schools and lived in the state for three years. “Something magical happened when those kids told their stories,” says the former Texas state representative Rick Noriega, a Democrat who sponsored the bill. “It was a humanizing of a very real issue dealing with children’s dreams and hopes. Every heart on that committee was touched, Republicans and Democrats. ” The legislation passed both houses almost unanimously and was signed by Rick Perry, then governor of Texas and now President Donald Trump’s pick for energy secretary. Texas became the first state, followed quickly by California, to allow Dreamers to pay   tuition. Today, 21 states charge Dreamers the same tuition as legal residents, including six carried by Trump  —   Florida, Kansas, Nebraska, Oklahoma, Utah and Texas. In many of those states, however, the   issue has turned politically treacherous. In Texas, efforts to repeal the tuition law come closer to passing every year, and Noriega says there is no chance the original measure would pass today. The leading national opponents of   tuition for Dreamers include the Republican senator Jeff Sessions, Trump’s choice for attorney general, and the secretary of state of Kansas, Kris Kobach, a Republican who was a leader of Trump’s transition team on immigration. Each argues that students who are in the United States illegally should not get a public benefit in any state that is denied to a citizen from another state. In other words, if Dreamers pay   tuition in Texas, citizen students next door in Arkansas and Oklahoma  —   or Massachusetts, for that matter  —   should have the same right. “How much sense does that make, to have people here illegally, and they have more benefits than those who are here legally?” Sessions asked in a Senate floor statement. Kobach used the same argument to bring   lawsuits against   tuition for Dreamers in Kansas and California. Judges found no legal basis for the claims and dismissed the cases. The larger debate over how to treat an estimated 11 million immigrants who came here illegally has been at a stalemate for decades, with advocates seeking a “path to citizenship” for   families who have been in the country for years and opponents denouncing “amnesty” for people who broke the law to enter the country. Amid hardening resistance in Congress to immigration reform, Dreamers brought pressure on Obama  —   including   and hunger strikes at his 2012 campaign offices  —   to use his executive power to create DACA. The program, announced on June 15, 2012, the 30th anniversary of the Supreme Court’s Plyler decision, proved transformative for Dreamers. They have entered college, taken    jobs, received driver’s licenses, bought cars. They now fly on planes, passing effortlessly through airport security. They still lack legal immigration status, but no longer are they exactly undocumented. “DACAmented,” many have called themselves. Even in states where they pay   tuition, Dreamers still struggle to afford college because they are disproportionately   and have no access to federal financial aid. Fewer than 10 percent of Dreamers who graduate from high school enroll in college. At a time when college graduates earn 70 percent more than those without degrees, these numbers conjure the 1982 warning by the Supreme Court that undocumented children could become a permanent underclass. In response, a handful of philanthropies have adopted the cause of sending students with DACA status to college. The biggest of these, TheDream. US, has raised $90 million to eventually finance 4, 000 students at public colleges, with significant contributions from Donald Graham, former publisher and chief executive of The Washington Post, and his family Mark Zuckerberg and Priscilla Chan Bill and Melinda Gates the   executive William Ackman and Michael Bloomberg, among others. (I was a reporter at The Washington Post from 1980 to 2008.) In 2014, TheDream. US began offering Dreamers full scholarships in states that charge them   tuition. Last year, in partnership with Delaware and Connecticut, the organization created the   program for students from the other 29 states, financed by $41 million in philanthropy from Graham and his family and two anonymous donors. The governors of Delaware and Connecticut agreed to charge roughly   tuition rates for the 34 scholars at Delaware State and the 42 at Eastern Connecticut State  —   a total of $80, 000 per student for tuition, room and board for four years. In an effort to   political opposition, Graham says, the philanthropy works only with schools, like Delaware State and Eastern Connecticut State, that have excess capacity, so that undocumented students are not displacing citizens. And private donors pay all expenses, so that no state dollars are spent. Still, when The Delaware State News ran an article in September about the D. S. U. opportunity scholars, the online comments complained that undocumented immigrants, not citizens, were benefiting. “Trump isn’t perfect, but I will vote for him because he puts Americans FIRST,” wrote a reader named John Huff of Magnolia, Del. “There are plenty of kids who are citizens who have the same dream and should come first. ” And as news of the scholarship spread on the Delaware campus this fall, a number of   students told Dreamers that they resented that their own families had to go into debt for a portion of their education costs while the DACA students got full scholarships. By then, Trump had mobilized   anger in large swaths of the country, having kicked off his campaign criticizing Mexican immigrants  —   “They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists”  —   and vowing to build a wall on the border to keep them out. In stump speeches, he promised to deport all 11 million undocumented immigrants and, in his first 100 days in office, to terminate DACA, labeling it “illegal amnesty. ” Both vows became instant applause lines. Indira declared her major in biological sciences at the beginning of the semester and started a demanding   curriculum with six classes, including biology and chemistry, both requiring labs. Her parents had insisted she not take a job, in order to devote herself to education, freeing up four hours a night that she had spent working in high school. With that extra time, she found the academic challenges manageable. Much harder was living apart from her   family for the first time in her life. Her mother texted her daily. “Good morning, hija,” she wrote one recent morning, using the Spanish word for daughter. “May God bless you today in school. Please be kind to everyone. ” That night, over FaceTime, Indira talked with two of her younger sisters, who like her were born in Mexico and are undocumented. One, a junior in high school, is already on a quest for college scholarships. She and Indira came up with potential essay ideas and discussed her résumé. Then Indira helped the other, a freshman who is the smartest of all the family’s children, Indira says, with physics homework. On weekends, she FaceTimes with her four youngest siblings  —   a sixth grader, a fourth grader, a third grader and a first grader  —   all of whom were born in Georgia and are citizens. Separation from family, from home, even from Mexican food made most of the opportunity scholars profoundly lonely. Estephany Martinez, a petite   major with long black hair, couldn’t stop thinking about her sisters in the first weeks. “Whenever we came home from school, all four sisters would sit in the living room and do our homework and talk and watch TV,” she recalled wistfully of her life in Winder, Ga. In Delaware, “I didn’t have anybody that cared for me. I didn’t have anyone to come home to. ” In early September, she summoned all the scholars to a gathering in the dorm’s   lounge. “All right, you guys, we’re going to be here for each other,” she said. “That part of our lives  —   being undocumented  —   is critical to who we are. We have to share our stories. ” Everyone crowded in, sitting on the sofa, spilling onto the floor, sitting shoulder to shoulder on counters that once were part of a kitchenette, sprawling into one another’s space. Carlos Gonzales of Manteo, N. C. a lanky and cheerful marketing major whose mother is a restaurant cook, broke down crying when he recalled the violence that drove his family from Mexico City. He, his mother and his younger sister moved to North Carolina when he was 7. It was his mother who encouraged him, beginning in elementary school, to reach for college. “I don’t want you to live the life we’re living now,” she told him. In high school, he was an honor student and varsity wrestler and runner, working nights and weekends at McDonald’s in his Outer Banks town. When he received the email telling him he was an opportunity scholar, he said: “I hugged my mom and cried for two hours. The only reason I stopped was I had to go to work. ” Indira told the harrowing story that led to her own family’s departure from Mexico. In 2004, when she was 6, three masked gunmen broke into their home, which housed her parents’ clinic, and robbed them of everything  —   money, jewelry, a new computer, a television, cameras and medications. They filed a report with the police, they said, who didn’t investigate, in deference to cartels then taking over Guerrero, now the most violent state in Mexico. An uncle of her father’s already had been killed. In subsequent years, a cousin of her mother’s, a veterinarian, was kidnapped and never found. Two nephews disappeared. Her mother’s sister has been kidnapped twice  —   most recently this past November  —   and returned only after her family paid steep ransoms. Weeks after the robbery, Indira’s family of five arrived in the United States on a tourist visa that her father procured a month earlier in hopes of taking everyone to Disney World. Instead, they went to Gainesville, where her father’s brother worked in construction  —   one of thousands of Mexican workers who flocked to the north Georgia community in the last 25 years, swelling the Hispanic population to more than 40 percent in 2013 from 8 percent in 1990. Indira said her parents are certain they would have been killed had they stayed. They decided to forfeit their careers for their family’s safety. “I no longer saw my future, but I saw my children’s future,” her father said to me. Antonio Patino, a   major who is a lifeguard and plays bass and guitar in his spare time, told the group about riding with his family in their car in 2015 in Lawrenceville, Ga. when a police officer pulled them over, though none of them understood why. His father, who is undocumented and processes returns for a local manufacturer, was driving but did not have a license. Antonio and his mother, younger sister and brother all watched in terror as his father was handcuffed, placed in a police cruiser and driven off to jail. As it turned out, he was released the next day after paying a fine of more than $800 and was not referred to immigration court for further proceedings, but the incident shook Antonio’s sense of belonging in America. “I felt like I got slapped in the face just for living, trying to be a normal person in this beautiful country,” he said. “It feels like a hole inside me. ” He said he now found himself gripped with fears for his parents’ safety at random moments during his days at D. S. U. It is as if he has swapped roles with his mother and father. “Like I’m now the parent and they’re the child, and I’m worried for them,” he told me. “Not being there, all these   swarm into my mind. What if out of nowhere they get pulled over again?” Calling them and hearing their voices usually comforts him. But after one such call, he said: “I went outside, and I had to cry a little. I was feeling like I couldn’t help them. ” A number of students shared the enormous sacrifices they had seen their parents make for them. Juan Chavez, 23, who grew up in Plymouth, Ind. and worked for five years after high school, told of his mother suffering a breakdown after her divorce from his father. He saw it as a response to the crushing instability of their lives, moving from one home to another in search of shelter. “She’s the strongest person I’ll ever know,” he said. “She’s my role model. My father figure as well as my mother. ” He continued: “I felt so helpless to make things better. I decided almost right then I’ll go to college and medical school if it takes me the rest of my life. ” He is now a psychology and   major, intending to become a psychiatrist. On and on the students went until almost 3 a. m. the common threads in their stories drawing them closer. It was the first time most of them had talked openly about being undocumented, but instead of feeling exposed, they felt safer. Until then, Antonio had gone out of his way to avoid conversations with   at D. S. U. about his scholarship, not wanting to have to explain that he got it because he was undocumented. The next day, though, he fell into conversation with a student who asked him how he happened to come all the way from Georgia to D. S. U. and he said without hesitation: “I got a scholarship. ” “What for?” “I’m undocumented,” Antonio said, surprised at how comfortable this felt. “O. K. man, that’s cool,” the student said. After their long night talking, the scholars also better understood what had propelled them all for as long as they could remember. Throughout high school, the opportunity scholars watched undocumented friends and siblings give up and drop out, shamed and beaten down by public scorn over illegal immigration and the   options awaiting even those who excelled in high school. But they kept on striving, steeled to the insults, positioning themselves for a breakthrough they couldn’t yet see. Now this all made sense. “This pain  —   it pushes us,” Estephany said. “It’s motivation. It has made me who I am. It makes me go through every day. ” “Now we know what drives us,” Indira said. One morning in   at 9:50 a. m. 10 minutes before Indira’s   class was scheduled to start, she and two other opportunity scholars were already ensconced in the three center   seats, notebooks, pens and textbooks at the ready. Indira was wearing a Harvard sweatshirt that a classmate bought for her when their   A. P.  class visited Boston. (Indira couldn’t afford to go.) “I’m going to get there one day,” she said with a confident smile. Most of the other students didn’t arrive until class was about to begin  —   or later  —   and there was little competition for the front rows. A similar scene unfolded that morning in the ultramodern science center, in   class, where Antonio and Jose Reyes Rios, another   major, sat front and center with an   classmate named Hanqaamo Lintisio, who is from Maryland and has a track scholarship. The three had formed a study group and tutored one another so effectively that they all scored above 100 on the midterm. (They nailed the bonus question.) Theirs were the only A’s in the class. The Dreamers gather daily at a long Formica table in a D. S. U. cafeteria for food and conversation. At lunch, Carla Moreno propped her English composition textbook, “Patterns for College Writing,” against a napkin holder, securing it with an apple. She paged through a chapter while eating her salad and chili dog. “It’s just a quiz,” she said, “but I want to keep my A. ” “I deal with a lot of students, and I feel like the Dreamers are at a different level,” says Kevin Noriega, the adviser for their scholarships. “They’re saying, ‘I’ve got to make this happen because it’s my only option. ’’u2009” Of the 488 scholars funded by TheDream. US who began college in 2014, 94 percent remain enrolled after their sophomore year research shows that only 66 percent of   college students nationally return after one year. “This is a   population with retention rates like Harvard’s,” Donald Graham says. Because beneficiaries of TheDream. US have full rides, they avoid a common problem faced by other disadvantaged students: running short of money for costs not covered by Pell grants or other forms of aid. One night in October before a biology exam, Indira went to the D. S. U. athletic center for a workout to relieve stress. She was armed with a stack of homemade flash cards and her iPhone, on which she had downloaded discussions of test topics from various websites. While pounding out three miles on the treadmill, she flipped through her study cards, then plugged in her earbuds for a YouTube lecture on glycolysis. Returning to her dorm, she sat down at her desk for a final review. Hanging on the wall in front of her was a collage of family photographs. One showed the whole family of nine around their dinner table. “When I’m struggling, I look at a picture of my mom or dad, and I say, ‘I’m working for that person,’’u2009” she said. That night, her studying complete, she took a last look at her parents’ picture and fell asleep listening to recordings of her biology professor’s lectures. She got an A on the exam. Indira’s determination to become a doctor requires more than a little imagination, because under current law in Georgia and many other states, licenses to practice medicine are reserved for citizens and legal residents. “I’m not planning my life based on the way things are today,” she said. “I’m thinking of the future. ” In her eyes, America is a land of   opportunity. Over Columbus Day weekend, she visited Washington for the first time with her roommate, Karen Baltazar, who is from Lawrenceville, Ga. and also wants to be a doctor. At the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial, Indira stood underneath Roosevelt’s Four Freedoms  —   freedom of speech, freedom of worship, freedom from want, freedom from fear  —   her arms raised high above her head, as if exulting in the message. Her smile was radiant. Karen snapped a picture, and Indira posted it on her Facebook page along with the caption, “I have never forgotten the reasons my parents brought me to this great country. ” Such unsinkable optimism, which I heard from many D. S. U. Dreamers in the early fall, is hard to maintain, and many of the estimated 65, 000 undocumented immigrants who graduate from high school every year  —   and thousands who drop out  —   simply can’t muster it. In a recent book, “Lives in Limbo,” Roberto G. Gonzales, an assistant professor at Harvard’s graduate school of education, writes that academically successful Dreamers are far outnumbered by those who become casualties of “the deeper and more   consequences of being undocumented: living in poverty, having parents and family members who also bear the burdens of being undocumented, watching friends moving forward but being unable to join them, watching opportunities pass you by, navigating a world of exclusions while constantly looking over your shoulder. ” At least some of the opportunity scholars’ optimism last fall came from their assumption, based on reported polls, that Hillary Clinton would be the next president. They were heartened by her speeches about keeping families together and pursuing comprehensive immigration reform. At the very least, they were confident that DACA would remain in effect under her leadership. Though they didn’t believe Trump could win, he unnerved them with his speeches branding Mexicans criminals who stole Americans’ jobs and lived off their tax dollars. They took this rhetoric as a personal affront and were horrified by the hatred they saw on the faces of those who cheered his words. “The only thing that depresses me is so many people support him,” Jose Reyes Rios, the   major, who aspires to work at Google one day, said in late September. On election night, a group of Dreamers gathered around the   TV in the dorm lobby, many of them studying as they watched returns. Indira had exams the next day in math and biology and arrived equipped with her flash cards. The mood turned dark after Trump won Florida. Everyone’s mind flooded with his vows that they had discounted until now  —   to revoke DACA, to deputize local police departments to enforce federal immigration laws. “We will issue detainers for all illegal immigrants who are arrested for any crime whatsoever, and they will be placed into immediate removal proceedings,” Trump said last summer in Arizona. As all of them knew well, these crimes included one of their parents’ daily activities  —   driving without a license. If DACA disappeared, and with it their Social Security numbers, their own driver’s licenses would be worthless. So would their federal work authorization, meaning most would lose the jobs that paid for their books, phones, clothes, travel home and anything else they needed. By 1 a. m. Indira became too distressed to concentrate. Olivia Bekale was one of four opportunity scholars who watched until Trump was declared the  . “We were just looking at each other and crying,” she says. “We hugged each other and went to our rooms. ” On the Sunday after the election, when they gathered in the dorm lobby, the opportunity scholars were struggling with something unfamiliar: despair. They had registered for DACA with the Department of Homeland Security, which now knew exactly where they were. “Life is going to be like it is for our parents,” said Victor Hernandez of Coats, N. C. stunned and shaking his head. “They could come pick us up and take us away any time. ” Social media brought aftershocks for all of them as they discovered that many of their best friends voted for Trump. Almost all of Antonio’s   swim teammates in Lawrenceville had Trump filters on their Facebook and Snapchat profile pictures. “All I could think was: You voted against me,” he said. “What did I do to you?” The day after the election, Indira couldn’t bear to call her mother until the afternoon. Instead, she confided her fears in text messages to her former science teacher, Teresa Leach. “I’ve never been so disappointed in this country,” she wrote. “I’ve never felt so powerless. . .. I’m scared about my family, my mom. . .. Not sure if I’ll even get my degree, much less go to medical school here. ” When Indira finally did call home, her mother insisted she was not afraid and told Indira that education was now even more important. Several of Indira’s friends back home told her they doubted Trump would follow through on all his campaign promises, and in any case, they couldn’t imagine he would target her. “These are people who helped me get to where I am, who remind me they love me, and I love them,” she said. “But they’ll never understand what we feel. They say, ‘He won’t do that.’ Do they think he’s going to send back all the immigrants except Indira?” A lifeline of sorts arrived the week after the election, when the students received letters from TheDream. US, Governor Markell and the president of D. S. U. pledging to stand behind their scholarships no matter what became of DACA. Donald Graham lined up attorneys to represent them if anyone challenged their right to be in school. But their bigger fears were for their parents. Antonio and Indira went home for Christmas to find their families filled with trepidation. “We’re trying to be invisible, trying to stay hidden,” Antonio’s father said, “do only the things we have to do to live, like go to work, go buy groceries. ” During the 2015 holiday season, they took a driving tour of the Christmas lights and celebrated New Year’s Eve in downtown Lawrenceville. “Now we can’t go to any festivities because for us it’s very dangerous,” his mother told me in their apartment in a complex in Buford, Ga. “There are a lot of police there. ” Antonio’s father said he worries about driving his daughter, Litzy, 15, home from her   practice at rush hour, when the police presence increases. Litzy was born in Georgia, and he thought of asking her to leave the team until she is old enough to drive because, as a citizen, she will be able to get a driver’s license. “But then I said to myself: ‘No! That’s crazy. That’s why we’re here  —   for our kids. So they can take advantage of every opportunity. ’’u2009” He continues to ferry her  —   carefully  —   during rush hour. Indira found her mother more frightened than at any time since receiving her deportation order. Her mother says she has no choice but to drive when someone at her church asks for help, when her children call for rides home and when she is needed at a charity medical clinic where she volunteers as a doctor’s assistant and translator. “Life changed after the election,” she told me in December, in her living room decorated with framed academic awards for each child. She was surrounded by her kids, who listened carefully. “The children know I don’t have a driver’s license. They know at any time maybe the police will take me again. ‘If I can’t come back,’ I tell them, ‘you have to go to school every day. You have to study hard  —   even harder. ’’u2009” By the time Indira and the other opportunity scholars returned to campus in January, all of them had come to the same conclusion: There was now only one thing they could control  —   their education. “The only way we can fight back is to excel in school,” Indira wrote to me in a text message. She felt weary in the aftermath of the election, but when she had this epiphany, she said: “I wasn’t tired anymore. I had that drive, that hunger to just come out on top. I was angry. I was staying at the library longer, going to the gym a lot more. ” Estephany Martinez focused on her life’s mission. “My goal is being a police chief  —   something that makes my voice louder,” said the   major. “I have to educate myself to get there. I want to show people who don’t believe in us: ‘I got all the way here. I’m starting from the bottom with education, and I’m going to get there. ’’u2009” As they settled into the semester, they monitored everything Trump and his close allies were saying about immigration, their moods shifting with each utterance. Back in December, they felt hopeful when Trump, in his interview as Time Magazine’s Person of the Year, said approving things about Dreamers and indicated that he would deport serious criminals before other undocumented immigrants. They were discouraged in January when Jeff Sessions, in his confirmation hearing to become attorney general, appeared unconcerned about the consequences of revoking DACA. They took heart two days later when Paul Ryan, the speaker of the House, said in a CNN   meeting that he wanted Congress to pass legislation making Dreamers “right with the law. ” Indira and other Georgia scholars were exhilarated in early January when a state court ordered the Board of Regents to allow DACA holders to pay   tuition. But their hopes collapsed when a state appeals court stayed the decision Trump appeared likely to revoke DACA before Georgia Dreamers could reap the benefits. “I said: ‘I don’t know what’ll happen next, but we’re here in this place, and the only way we can win is to succeed in our education,’’u2009” Indira told me. Soon after classes started, the opportunity scholars learned that their collective grade point average for the first semester was a 3. 76. Six of the 34 students had achieved a perfect 4. 0. Indira was one of them. “Succeeding for me is how I can get my revenge,” she told me over the phone, interrupting her biology homework for a few minutes. “I want to break the stereotype of us being here taking jobs away and not helping the economy. I want Trump to see we’re the total opposite of what he thinks. ”

0 - WASHINGTON  —   When Special Agent Adrian Hawkins of the Federal Bureau of Investigation called the Democratic National Committee in September 2015 to pass along some troubling news about its computer network, he was transferred, naturally, to the help desk. His message was brief, if alarming. At least one computer system belonging to the D. N. C. had been compromised by hackers federal investigators had named “the Dukes,” a cyberespionage team linked to the Russian government. The F. B. I. knew it well: The bureau had spent the last few years trying to kick the Dukes out of the unclassified email systems of the White House, the State Department and even the Joint Chiefs of Staff, one of the government’s   networks. Yared Tamene, the   contractor at the D. N. C. who fielded the call, was no expert in cyberattacks. His first moves were to check Google for “the Dukes” and conduct a cursory search of the D. N. C. computer system logs to look for hints of such a cyberintrusion. By his own account, he did not look too hard even after Special Agent Hawkins called back repeatedly over the next several weeks  —   in part because he wasn’t certain the caller was a real F. B. I. agent and not an impostor. “I had no way of differentiating the call I just received from a prank call,” Mr. Tamene wrote in an internal memo, obtained by The New York Times, that detailed his contact with the F. B. I. It was the cryptic first sign of a cyberespionage and   campaign devised to disrupt the 2016 presidential election, the first such attempt by a foreign power in American history. What started as an   operation, intelligence officials believe, ultimately morphed into an effort to harm one candidate, Hillary Clinton, and tip the election to her opponent, Donald J. Trump. Like another famous American election scandal, it started with a   at the D. N. C. The first time, 44 years ago at the committee’s old offices in the Watergate complex, the burglars planted listening devices and jimmied a filing cabinet. This time, the burglary was conducted from afar, directed by the Kremlin, with   emails and zeros and ones. An examination by The Times of the Russian operation  —   based on interviews with dozens of players targeted in the attack, intelligence officials who investigated it and Obama administration officials who deliberated over the best response  —   reveals a series of missed signals, slow responses and a continuing underestimation of the seriousness of the cyberattack. The D. N. C. ’s fumbling encounter with the F. B. I. meant the best chance to halt the Russian intrusion was lost. The failure to grasp the scope of the attacks undercut efforts to minimize their impact. And the White House’s reluctance to respond forcefully meant the Russians have not paid a heavy price for their actions, a decision that could prove critical in deterring future cyberattacks. The   approach of the F. B. I. meant that Russian hackers could roam freely through the committee’s network for nearly seven months before top D. N. C. officials were alerted to the attack and hired cyberexperts to protect their systems. In the meantime, the hackers moved on to targets outside the D. N. C. including Mrs. Clinton’s campaign chairman, John D. Podesta, whose private email account was hacked months later. Even Mr. Podesta, a savvy Washington insider who had written a 2014 report on cyberprivacy for President Obama, did not truly understand the gravity of the hacking. By last summer, Democrats watched in helpless fury as their private emails and confidential documents appeared online day after day  —   procured by Russian intelligence agents, posted on WikiLeaks and other websites, then eagerly reported on by the American media, including The Times. Mr. Trump gleefully cited many of the purloined emails on the campaign trail. The fallout included the resignations of Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz of Florida, the chairwoman of the D. N. C. and most of her top party aides. Leading Democrats were sidelined at the height of the campaign, silenced by revelations of embarrassing emails or consumed by the scramble to deal with the hacking. Though   by the public, confidential documents taken by the Russian hackers from the D. N. C. ’s sister organization, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, turned up in congressional races in a dozen states, tainting some of them with accusations of scandal. In recent days, a skeptical   the nation’s intelligence agencies and the two major parties have become embroiled in an extraordinary public dispute over what evidence exists that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia moved beyond mere espionage to deliberately try to subvert American democracy and pick the winner of the presidential election. Many of Mrs. Clinton’s closest aides believe that the Russian assault had a profound impact on the election, while conceding that other factors  —   Mrs. Clinton’s weaknesses as a candidate her private email server the public statements of the F. B. I. director, James B. Comey, about her handling of classified information  —   were also important. While there’s no way to be certain of the ultimate impact of the hack, this much is clear: A     weapon that Russia had   in elections from Ukraine to Europe was trained on the United States, with devastating effectiveness. For Russia, with an enfeebled economy and a nuclear arsenal it cannot use short of   war, cyberpower proved the perfect weapon: cheap, hard to see coming, hard to trace. “There shouldn’t be any doubt in anybody’s mind,” Adm. Michael S. Rogers, the director of the National Security Agency and commander of United States Cyber Command, said at a postelection conference. “This was not something that was done casually, this was not something that was done by chance, this was not a target that was selected purely arbitrarily,” he said. “This was a conscious effort by a   to attempt to achieve a specific effect. ” For the people whose emails were stolen, this new form of political sabotage has left a trail of shock and professional damage. Neera Tanden, president of the Center for American Progress and a key Clinton supporter, recalls walking into the busy Clinton transition offices, humiliated to see her face on television screens as pundits discussed a leaked email in which she had called Mrs. Clinton’s instincts “suboptimal. ” “It was just a sucker punch to the gut every day,” Ms. Tanden said. “It was the worst professional experience of my life. ” The United States, too, has carried out cyberattacks, and in decades past the C. I. A. tried to subvert foreign elections. But the Russian attack is increasingly understood across the political spectrum as an ominous historic landmark  —   with one notable exception: Mr. Trump has rejected the findings of the intelligence agencies he will soon oversee as “ridiculous,” insisting that the hacker may be American, or Chinese, but that “they have no idea. ” Mr. Trump cited the reported disagreements between the agencies about whether Mr. Putin intended to help elect him. On Tuesday, a Russian government spokesman echoed Mr. Trump’s scorn. “This tale of ‘hacks’ resembles a banal brawl between American security officials over spheres of influence,” Maria Zakharova, the spokeswoman for the Russian Foreign Ministry, wrote on Facebook. Over the weekend, four prominent senators  —   two Republicans and two Democrats  —   joined forces to pledge an investigation while pointedly ignoring Mr. Trump’s skeptical claims. “Democrats and Republicans must work together, and across the jurisdictional lines of the Congress, to examine these recent incidents thoroughly and devise comprehensive solutions to deter and defend against further cyberattacks,” said Senators John McCain, Lindsey Graham, Chuck Schumer and Jack Reed. “This cannot become a partisan issue,” they said. “The stakes are too high for our country. ” Sitting in the basement of the Democratic National Committee headquarters, below a   2012 portrait of a smiling Barack Obama, is a   filing cabinet missing the handle on the bottom drawer. Only a framed newspaper story hanging on the wall hints at the importance of this aged piece of office furniture. “GOP Security Aide Among 5 Arrested in Bugging Affair,” reads the headline from the front page of The Washington Post on June 19, 1972, with the bylines of Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein. Andrew Brown, 37, the technology director at the D. N. C. was born after that famous  . But as he began to plan for this year’s election cycle, he was well aware that the D. N. C. could become a   target again. There were aspirations to ensure that the D. N. C. was well protected against cyberintruders  —   and then there was the reality, Mr. Brown and his bosses at the organization acknowledged: The D. N. C. was a nonprofit group, dependent on donations, with a fraction of the security budget that a corporation its size would have. “There was never enough money to do everything we needed to do,” Mr. Brown said. The D. N. C. had a standard email   service, intended to block phishing attacks and malware created to resemble legitimate email. But when Russian hackers started in on the D. N. C. the committee did not have the most advanced systems in place to track suspicious traffic, internal D. N. C. memos show. Mr. Tamene, who reports to Mr. Brown and fielded the call from the F. B. I. agent, was not a   D. N. C. employee he works for a   contracting firm called The MIS Department. He was left to figure out, largely on his own, how to respond  —   and even whether the man who had called in to the D. N. C. switchboard was really an F. B. I. agent. “The F. B. I. thinks the D. N. C. has at least one compromised computer on its network and the F. B. I. wanted to know if the D. N. C. is aware, and if so, what the D. N. C. is doing about it,” Mr. Tamene wrote in an internal memo about his contacts with the F. B. I. He added that “the Special Agent told me to look for a specific type of malware dubbed ‘Dukes’ by the U. S. intelligence community and in cybersecurity circles. ” Part of the problem was that Special Agent Hawkins did not show up in person at the D. N. C. Nor could he email anyone there, as that risked alerting the hackers that the F. B. I. knew they were in the system. Mr. Tamene’s initial scan of the D. N. C. system  —   using his    tools and incomplete targeting information from the F. B. I.  —   found nothing. So when Special Agent Hawkins called repeatedly in October, leaving voice mail messages for Mr. Tamene, urging him to call back, “I did not return his calls, as I had nothing to report,” Mr. Tamene explained in his memo. In November, Special Agent Hawkins called with more ominous news. A D. N. C. computer was “calling home, where home meant Russia,” Mr. Tamene’s memo says, referring to software sending information to Moscow. “SA Hawkins added that the F. B. I. thinks that this calling home behavior could be the result of a   attack. ” Mr. Brown knew that Mr. Tamene, who declined to comment, was fielding calls from the F. B. I. But he was tied up on a different problem: evidence suggesting that the campaign of Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, Mrs. Clinton’s main Democratic opponent, had improperly gained access to her campaign data. Ms. Wasserman Schultz, then the D. N. C. ’s chairwoman, and Amy Dacey, then its chief executive, said in interviews that neither of them was notified about the early reports that the committee’s system had likely been compromised. Shawn Henry, who once led the F. B. I. ’s cyber division and is now president of CrowdStrike Services, the cybersecurity firm retained by the D. N. C. in April, said he was baffled that the F. B. I. did not call a more senior official at the D. N. C. or send an agent in person to the party headquarters to try to force a more vigorous response. “We are not talking about an office that is in the middle of the woods of Montana,” Mr. Henry said. “We are talking about an office that is half a mile from the F. B. I. office that is getting the notification. ” “This is not a    delicatessen or a local library. This is a critical piece of the U. S. infrastructure because it relates to our electoral process, our elected officials, our legislative process, our executive process,” he added. “To me it is a   serious issue, and if after a couple of months you don’t see any results, somebody ought to raise that to a higher level. ” The F. B. I. declined to comment on the agency’s handling of the hack. “The F. B. I. takes very seriously any compromise of public and private sector systems,” it said in a statement, adding that agents “will continue to share information” to help targets “safeguard their systems against the actions of persistent cybercriminals. ” By March, Mr. Tamene and his team had met at least twice in person with the F. B. I. and concluded that Agent Hawkins was really a federal employee. But then the situation took a dire turn. A second team of   hackers began to target the D. N. C. and other players in the political world, particularly Democrats. Billy Rinehart, a former D. N. C. regional field director who was then working for Mrs. Clinton’s campaign, got an odd email warning from Google. “Someone just used your password to try to sign into your Google account,” the March 22 email said, adding that the   attempt had occurred in Ukraine. “Google stopped this   attempt. You should change your password immediately. ” Mr. Rinehart was in Hawaii at the time. He remembers checking his email at 4 a. m. for messages from East Coast associates. Without thinking much about the notification, he clicked on the “change password” button and half asleep, as best he can remember, he typed in a new password. What he did not know until months later is that he had just given the Russian hackers access to his email account. Hundreds of similar phishing emails were being sent to American political targets, including an identical email sent on March 19 to Mr. Podesta, chairman of the Clinton campaign. Given how many emails Mr. Podesta received through this personal email account, several aides also had access to it, and one of them noticed the warning email, sending it to a computer technician to make sure it was legitimate before anyone clicked on the “change password” button. “This is a legitimate email,” Charles Delavan, a Clinton campaign aide, replied to another of Mr. Podesta’s aides, who had noticed the alert. “John needs to change his password immediately. ” With another click, a decade of emails that Mr. Podesta maintained in his Gmail account  —   a total of about 60, 000  —   were unlocked for the Russian hackers. Mr. Delavan, in an interview, said that his bad advice was a result of a typo: He knew this was a phishing attack, as the campaign was getting dozens of them. He said he had meant to type that it was an “illegitimate” email, an error that he said has plagued him ever since. During this second wave, the hackers also gained access to the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, and then, through a virtual private network connection, to the main computer network of the D. N. C. The F. B. I. observed this surge of activity as well, again reaching out to Mr. Tamene to warn him. Yet Mr. Tamene still saw no reason to be alarmed: He found copies of the phishing emails in the D. N. C. ’s spam filter. But he had no reason, he said, to believe that the computer systems had been infiltrated. One bit of progress had finally been made by the middle of April: The D. N. C. seven months after it had first been warned, finally installed a “robust set of monitoring tools,” Mr. Tamene’s internal memo says. The United States had two decades of warning that Russia’s intelligence agencies were trying to break into America’s most sensitive computer networks. But the Russians have always managed to stay a step ahead. Their first major attack was detected on Oct. 7, 1996, when a computer operator at the Colorado School of Mines discovered some nighttime computer activity he could not explain. The school had a major contract with the Navy, and the operator warned his contacts there. But as happened two decades later at the D. N. C. at first “everyone was unable to connect the dots,” said Thomas Rid, a scholar at King’s College in London who has studied the attack. Investigators gave it a name  —   Moonlight Maze  —   and spent two years, often working day and night, tracing how it hopped from the Navy to the Department of Energy to the Air Force and NASA. In the end, they concluded that the total number of files stolen, if printed and stacked, would be taller than the Washington Monument. Whole weapons designs were flowing out the door, and it was a first taste of what was to come: an escalating campaign of cyberattacks around the world. But for years, the Russians stayed largely out of the headlines, thanks to the Chinese  —   who took bigger risks, and often got caught. They stole the designs for the   fighter jet, corporate secrets for rolling steel, even the blueprints for gas pipelines that supply much of the United States. And during the 2008 presidential election cycle, Chinese intelligence hacked into the campaigns of Mr. Obama and Mr. McCain, making off with internal position papers and communications. But they didn’t publish any of it. The Russians had not gone away, of course. “They were just a lot more stealthy,” said Kevin Mandia, a former Air Force intelligence officer who spent most of his days fighting off Russian cyberattacks before founding Mandiant, a cybersecurity firm that is now a division of FireEye  —   and the company the Clinton campaign brought in to secure its own systems. The Russians were also quicker to turn their attacks to political purposes. A 2007 cyberattack on Estonia, a former Soviet republic that had joined NATO, sent a message that Russia could paralyze the country without invading it. The next year cyberattacks were used during Russia’s war with Georgia. But American officials did not imagine that the Russians would dare try those techniques inside the United States. They were largely focused on preventing what former Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta warned was an approaching “cyber Pearl Harbor”  —   a shutdown of the power grid or cellphone networks. But in 2014 and 2015, a Russian hacking group began systematically targeting the State Department, the White House and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. “Each time, they eventually met with some form of success,” Michael Sulmeyer, a former cyberexpert for the secretary of defense, and Ben Buchanan, now both of the Harvard Cyber Security Project, wrote recently in a    published paper for the Carnegie Endowment. The Russians grew stealthier and stealthier, tricking government computers into sending out data while disguising the electronic “command and control” messages that set off alarms for anyone looking for malicious actions. The State Department was so crippled that it repeatedly closed its systems to throw out the intruders. At one point, officials traveling to Vienna with Secretary of State John Kerry for the Iran nuclear negotiations had to set up commercial Gmail accounts just to communicate with one another and with reporters traveling with them. Mr. Obama was briefed regularly on all this, but he made a decision that many in the White House now regret: He did not name Russians publicly, or issue sanctions. There was always a reason: fear of escalating a cyberwar, and concern that the United States needed Russia’s cooperation in negotiations over Syria. “We’d have all these circular meetings,” one senior State Department official said, “in which everyone agreed you had to push back at the Russians and push back hard. But it didn’t happen. ” So the Russians escalated again  —   breaking into systems not just for espionage, but to publish or broadcast what they found, known as “doxing” in the cyberworld. It was a brazen change in tactics, moving the Russians from espionage to influence operations. In February 2014, they broadcast an intercepted phone call between Victoria Nuland, the assistant secretary of state who handles Russian affairs and has a contentious relationship with Mr. Putin, and Geoffrey Pyatt, the United States ambassador to Ukraine. Ms. Nuland was heard describing a   American effort to broker a deal in Ukraine, then in political turmoil. They were not the only ones on whom the Russians used the    strategy. The Open Society Foundation, run by George Soros, was a major target, and when its documents were released, some turned out to have been altered to make it appear as if the foundation was financing Russian opposition members. Last year, the attacks became more aggressive. Russia hacked a major French television station, frying critical hardware. Around Christmas, it attacked part of the power grid in Ukraine, dropping a portion of the country into darkness, killing backup generators and taking control of generators. In retrospect, it was a warning shot. The attacks “were not fully integrated military operations,” Mr. Sulmeyer said. But they showed an increasing boldness. The day before the White House Correspondents’ Association dinner in April, Ms. Dacey, the D. N. C. ’s chief executive, was preparing for a night of parties when she got an urgent phone call. With the new monitoring system in place, Mr. Tamene had examined administrative logs of the D. N. C. ’s computer system and found something very suspicious: An unauthorized person, with   security status, had gained access to the D. N. C. ’s computers. “Not sure it is related to what the F. B. I. has been noticing,” said one internal D. N. C. email sent on April 29. “The D. N. C. may have been hacked in a serious way this week, with password theft, etc. ” No one knew just how bad the breach was  —   but it was clear that a lot more than a single filing cabinet worth of materials might have been taken. A secret committee was immediately created, including Ms. Dacey, Ms. Wasserman Schultz, Mr. Brown and Michael Sussmann, a former cybercrimes prosecutor at the Department of Justice who now works at Perkins Coie, the Washington law firm that handles D. N. C. political matters. “Three most important questions,” Mr. Sussmann wrote to his clients the night the   was confirmed. “1) What data was accessed? 2) How was it done? 3) How do we stop it?” Mr. Sussmann instructed his clients not to use D. N. C. email because they had just one opportunity to lock the hackers out  —   an effort that could be foiled if the hackers knew that the D. N. C. was on to them. “You only get one chance to raise the drawbridge,” Mr. Sussmann said. “If the adversaries know you are aware of their presence, they will take steps to burrow in, or erase the logs that show they were present. ” The D. N. C. immediately hired CrowdStrike, a cybersecurity firm, to scan its computers, identify the intruders and build a new computer and telephone system from scratch. Within a day, CrowdStrike confirmed that the intrusion had originated in Russia, Mr. Sussmann said. The work that such companies do is a computer version of   crime scene investigation, with fingerprints, bullet casings and DNA swabs replaced by an electronic trail that can be just as incriminating. And just as police detectives learn to identify the telltale methods of a veteran burglar, so CrowdStrike investigators recognized the distinctive handiwork of Cozy Bear and Fancy Bear. Those are CrowdStrike’s nicknames for the two Russian hacking groups that the firm found at work inside the D. N. C. network. Cozy Bear  —   the group also known as the Dukes or A. P. T. 29, for “advanced persistent threat”  —   may or may not be associated with the F. S. B. the main successor to the   K. G. B. but it is widely believed to be a Russian government operation. It made its first appearance in 2014, said Dmitri Alperovitch, CrowdStrike’s   and chief technology officer. It was Cozy Bear, CrowdStrike concluded, that first penetrated the D. N. C. in the summer of 2015, by sending   emails to a long list of American government agencies, Washington nonprofits and government contractors. Whenever someone clicked on a phishing message, the Russians would enter the network, “exfiltrate” documents of interest and stockpile them for intelligence purposes. “Once they got into the D. N. C. they found the data valuable and decided to continue the operation,” said Mr. Alperovitch, who was born in Russia and moved to the United States as a teenager. Only in March 2016 did Fancy Bear show up  —   first penetrating the computers of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, and then jumping to the D. N. C. investigators believe. Fancy Bear, sometimes called A. P. T. 28 and believed to be directed by the G. R. U. Russia’s military intelligence agency, is an older outfit, tracked by Western investigators for nearly a decade. It was Fancy Bear that got hold of Mr. Podesta’s email. Attribution, as the skill of identifying a cyberattacker is known, is more art than science. It is often impossible to name an attacker with absolute certainty. But over time, by accumulating a reference library of hacking techniques and targets, it is possible to spot repeat offenders. Fancy Bear, for instance, has gone after military and political targets in Ukraine and Georgia, and at NATO installations. That largely rules out cybercriminals and most countries, Mr. Alperovitch said. “There’s no plausible actor that has an interest in all those victims other than Russia,” he said. Another clue: The Russian hacking groups tended to be active during working hours in the Moscow time zone. To their astonishment, Mr. Alperovitch said, CrowdStrike experts found signs that the two Russian hacking groups had not coordinated their attacks. Fancy Bear, apparently not knowing that Cozy Bear had been rummaging in D. N. C. files for months, took many of the same documents. In the six weeks after CrowdStrike’s arrival, in total secrecy, the computer system at the D. N. C. was replaced. For a weekend, email and phones were shut off employees were told it was a system upgrade. All laptops were turned in and the hard drives wiped clean, with the uninfected information on them imaged to new drives. Though D. N. C. officials had learned that the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee had been infected, too, they did not notify their sister organization, which was in the same building, because they were afraid that it would leak. All of this work took place as the bitter contest for the Democratic nomination continued to play out between Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Sanders, and it was already causing a major distraction for Ms. Wasserman Schultz and the D. N. C. ’s chief executive. “This was not a bump in the road  —   bumps in the road happen all the time,” she said in an interview. “Two different Russian spy agencies had hacked into our network and stolen our property. And we did not yet know what they had taken. But we knew they had very broad access to our network. There was a tremendous amount of uncertainty. And it was chilling. ” The D. N. C. executives and their lawyer had their first formal meeting with senior F. B. I. officials in   nine months after the bureau’s first call to the   contractor. Among the early requests at that meeting, according to participants: that the federal government make a quick “attribution” formally blaming actors with ties to Russian government for the attack to make clear that it was not routine hacking but foreign espionage. “You have a presidential election underway here and you know that the Russians have hacked into the D. N. C. ,” Mr. Sussmann said, recalling the message to the F. B. I. “We need to tell the American public that. And soon. ” In   on Mr. Sussmann’s advice, D. N. C. leaders decided to take a bold step. Concerned that word of the hacking might leak, they decided to go public in The Washington Post with the news that the committee had been attacked. That way, they figured, they could get ahead of the story, win a little sympathy from voters for being victimized by Russian hackers and refocus on the campaign. But the very next day, a new, deeply unsettling shock awaited them. Someone calling himself Guccifer 2. 0 appeared on the web, claiming to be the D. N. C. hacker  —   and he posted a confidential committee document detailing Mr. Trump’s record and half a dozen other documents to prove his bona fides. “And it’s just a tiny part of all docs I downloaded from the Democrats networks,” he wrote. Then something more ominous: “The main part of the papers, thousands of files and mails, I gave to WikiLeaks. They will publish them soon. ” It was bad enough that Russian hackers had been spying inside the committee’s network for months. Now the public release of documents had turned a conventional espionage operation into something far more menacing: political sabotage, an unpredictable, uncontrollable menace for Democratic campaigns. Guccifer 2. 0 borrowed the moniker of an earlier hacker, a Romanian who called himself Guccifer and was jailed for breaking into the personal computers of former President George W. Bush, former Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and other notables. This new attacker seemed intent on showing that the D. N. C. ’s cyberexperts at CrowdStrike were wrong to blame Russia. Guccifer 2. 0 called himself a “lone hacker” and mocked CrowdStrike for calling the attackers “sophisticated. ” But online investigators quickly undercut his story. On a whim, Lorenzo   a writer for Motherboard, the tech and culture site of Vice, tried to contact Guccifer 2. 0 by direct message on Twitter. “Surprisingly, he answered right away,” Mr.   said. But whoever was on the other end seemed to be mocking him. “I asked him why he did it, and he said he wanted to expose the Illuminati. He called himself a Gucci lover. And he said he was Romanian. ” That gave Mr.   an idea. Using Google Translate, he sent the purported hacker some questions in Romanian. The answers came back in Romanian. But when he was offline, Mr.   checked with a couple of native speakers, who told him Guccifer 2. 0 had apparently been using Google Translate as well  —   and was clearly not the Romanian he claimed to be. Cyberresearchers found other clues pointing to Russia. Microsoft Word documents posted by Guccifer 2. 0 had been edited by someone calling himself, in Russian, Felix Edmundovich  —   an obvious nom de guerre honoring the founder of the Soviet secret police, Felix Edmundovich Dzerzhinsky. Bad links in the texts were marked by warnings in Russian, generated by what was clearly a   version of Word. When Mr.   managed to engage Guccifer 2. 0 over a period of weeks, he found that his interlocutor’s tone and manner changed. “At first he was careless and colloquial. Weeks later, he was curt and more calculating,” he said. “It seemed like a group of people, and a very sloppy attempt to cover up. ” Computer experts drew the same conclusion about DCLeaks. com, a site that sprang up in June, claiming to be the work of “hacktivists” but posting more stolen documents. It, too, seemed to be a clumsy front for the same Russians who had stolen the documents. Notably, the website was registered in April, suggesting that the Russian hacking team planned well in advance to make public what it stole. In addition to what Guccifer 2. 0 published on his site, he provided material directly on request to some bloggers and publications. The steady flow of Guccifer 2. 0 documents constantly undercut Democratic messaging efforts. On July 6, 12 days before the Republican National Convention began in Cleveland, Guccifer released the D. N. C. ’s battle plan and budget for countering it. For Republican operatives, it was insider gold. Then WikiLeaks, a far more established outlet, began to publish the hacked material  —   just as Guccifer 2. 0 had promised. On July 22, three days before the start of the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia, WikiLeaks dumped out 44, 053 D. N. C. emails with 17, 761 attachments. Some of the messages made clear that some D. N. C. officials favored Mrs. Clinton over her progressive challenger, Mr. Sanders. That was no shock Mr. Sanders, after all, had been an independent socialist, not a Democrat, during his long career in Congress, while Mrs. Clinton had been one of the party’s stars for decades. But the emails, some of them crude or insulting, infuriated Sanders delegates as they arrived in Philadelphia. Ms. Wasserman Schultz resigned under pressure on the eve of the convention where she had planned to preside. Mr. Trump, by now the Republican nominee, expressed delight at the continuing jolts to his opponent, and he began to use Twitter and his stump speeches to highlight the WikiLeaks releases. On July 25, he sent out a lighthearted tweet: “The new joke in town,” he wrote, “is that Russia leaked the disastrous D. N. C.   which should never have been written (stupid) because Putin likes me. ” But WikiLeaks was far from finished. On Oct. 7, a month before the election, the site began the serial publication of thousands of private emails to and from Mr. Podesta, Mrs. Clinton’s campaign manager. The same day, the United States formally accused the Russian government of being behind the hackings, in a joint statement by the director of national intelligence and the Department of Homeland Security, and Mr. Trump suffered his worst blow to date, with the release of a recording in which he bragged about sexually assaulting women. The Podesta emails were nowhere near as sensational as the Trump video. But, released by WikiLeaks day after day over the last month of the campaign, they provided material for countless news reports. They disclosed the contents of Mrs. Clinton’s speeches to large banks, which she had refused to release. They exposed tensions inside the campaign, including disagreements over donations to the Clinton Foundation that staff members thought might look bad for the candidate and Ms. Tanden’s complaint that Mrs. Clinton’s instincts were “suboptimal. ” “I was just mortified,” Ms. Tanden said in an interview. Her emails were released on the eve of one of the presidential debates, she recalled. “I put my hands over my head and said, ‘I can’t believe this is happening to me. ’” Though she had regularly appeared on television to support Mrs. Clinton, she canceled her appearances because all the questions were about what she had said in the emails. Ms. Tanden, like other Democrats whose messages became public, said it was obvious to her that WikiLeaks was trying its best to damage the Clinton campaign. “If you care about transparency, you put all the emails out at once,” she said. “But they wanted to hurt her. So they put them out 1, 800 to 3, 000 a day. ” The Trump campaign knew in advance about WikiLeaks’ plans. Days before the Podesta email release began, Roger Stone, a Republican operative working with the Trump campaign, sent out an excited tweet about what was coming. But in an interview, Mr. Stone said he had no role in the leaks he had just heard from an American with ties to WikiLeaks that damning emails were coming. Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder and editor, has resisted the conclusion that his site became a   for Russian hackers working for Mr. Putin’s government or that he was deliberately trying to undermine Mrs. Clinton’s candidacy. But the evidence on both counts appears compelling. In a series of email exchanges, Mr. Assange refused to say anything about WikiLeaks’ source for the hacked material. He denied that he had made his animus toward Mrs. Clinton clear in public statements (“False. But what is this? Junior high? ”) or that the site had timed the releases for maximum negative effect on her campaign. “WikiLeaks makes its decisions based on newsworthiness, including for its recent epic scoops,” he wrote. Mr. Assange disputed the conclusion of the Oct. 7 statement from the intelligence agencies that the leaks were “intended to interfere with the U. S. election process. ” “This is false,” he wrote. “As the disclosing party we know that this was not the intent. Publishers publishing newsworthy information during an election is part of a free election. ” But asked whether he believed the leaks were one reason for Mr. Trump’s election, Mr. Assange seemed happy to take credit. “Americans extensively engaged with our publications,” he wrote. “According to Facebook statistics WikiLeaks was the most referenced political topic during October. ” Though Mr. Assange did not say so, WikiLeaks’ best defense may be the conduct of the mainstream American media. Every major publication, including The Times, published multiple stories citing the D. N. C. and Podesta emails posted by WikiLeaks, becoming a de facto instrument of Russian intelligence. Mr. Putin, a student of martial arts, had turned two institutions at the core of American democracy  —   political campaigns and independent media  —   to his own ends. The media’s appetite for the hacked material, and its focus on the gossipy content instead of the Russian source, disturbed some of those whose personal emails were being reposted across the web. “What was really surprising to me?” Ms. Tanden said. “I could not believe that reporters were covering it. ” Inside the White House, as Mr. Obama’s advisers debated their response, their conversation turned to North Korea. In late 2014, hackers working for Kim   the North’s young and unpredictable leader, had carried out a   attack on Sony Pictures Entertainment intended to stop the Christmastime release of a comedy about a C. I. A. plot to kill Mr. Kim. In that case, embarrassing emails had also been released. But the real damage was done to Sony’s own systems: More than 70 percent of its computers melted down when a particularly virulent form of malware was released. Within weeks, intelligence agencies traced the attack back to the North and its leadership. Mr. Obama called North Korea out in public, and issued some    sanctions. The Chinese even cooperated, briefly cutting off the North’s internet connections. As the first Situation Room meetings on the Russian hacking began in July, “it was clear that Russia was going to be a much more complicated case,” said one participant. The Russians clearly had a more sophisticated understanding of American politics, and they were masters of “kompromat,” their term for compromising information. But a formal “attribution report” still had not been forwarded to the president. “It took forever,” one senior administration official said, complaining about the pace at which the intelligence assessments moved through the system. In August a group that called itself the “Shadow Brokers” published a set of software tools that looked like what the N. S. A. uses to break into foreign computer networks and install “implants,” malware that can be used for surveillance or attack. The code came from the Tailored Access Operations unit of the N. S. A. a secretive group that mastered the arts of surveillance and cyberwar. The assumption  —   still unproved  —   was that the code was put out in the open by the Russians as a warning: Retaliate for the D. N. C. and there are a lot more secrets, from the hackings of the State Department, the White House and the Pentagon, that might be spilled as well. One senior official compared it to the scene in “The Godfather” where the head of a favorite horse is left in a bed, as a warning. The N. S. A. said nothing. But by late August, Admiral Rogers, its director, was pressing for a more muscular response to the Russians. In his role as director of the Pentagon’s Cyber Command, he proposed a series of potential  . While officials will not discuss them in detail, the possible counterstrikes reportedly included operations that would turn the tables on Mr. Putin, exposing his financial links to Russia’s oligarchs, and punching holes in the Russian internet to allow dissidents to get their message out. Pentagon officials judged the measures too unsubtle and ordered up their own set of options. But in the end, none of those were formally presented to the president. In a series of “deputies meetings” run by Avril Haines, the deputy national security adviser and a former deputy director of the C. I. A. several officials warned that an overreaction by the administration would play into Mr. Putin’s hands. “If we went to Defcon 4,” one frequent participant in Ms. Haines’s meetings said, using a phrase from the Cold War days of warnings of war, “we would be saying to the public that we didn’t have confidence in the integrity of our voting system. ” Even something seemingly straightforward  —   using the president’s executive powers, bolstered after the Sony incident, to place economic and travel sanctions on cyberattackers  —   seemed too risky. “No one was all that eager to impose costs before Election Day,” said another participant in the classified meeting. “Any retaliatory measures were seen through the prism of what would happen on Election Day. ” Instead, when Mr. Obama’s national security team reconvened after summer vacation, the focus turned to a crash effort to secure the nation’s voting machines and   rolls from hacking. The scenario they discussed most frequently  —   one that turned out not to be an issue  —   was a narrow vote in favor of Mrs. Clinton, followed by a declaration by Mr. Trump that the vote was “rigged” and more leaks intended to undercut her legitimacy. Donna Brazile, the interim chairwoman of the D. N. C. became increasingly frustrated as the clock continued to run down on the presidential election  —   and still there was no broad public condemnation by the White House, or Republican Party leaders, of the attack as an act of foreign espionage. Ms. Brazile even reached out to Reince Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, urging him twice in private conversations and in a letter to join her in condemning the attacks  —   an offer he declined to take up. “We just kept hearing the government would respond, the government would respond,” she said. “Once upon a time, if a foreign government interfered with our election we would respond as a nation, not as a political party. ” But Mr. Obama did decide that he would deliver a warning to Mr. Putin in person at a Group of 20 summit meeting in Hangzhou, China, the last time they would be in the same place while Mr. Obama was still in office. When the two men met for a tense   Mr. Obama explicitly warned Mr. Putin of a strong American response if there was continued effort to influence the election or manipulate the vote, according to White House officials who were not present for the    meeting. Later that day, Mr. Obama made a rare reference to America’s own offensive cybercapacity, which he has almost never talked about. “Frankly, both offensively and defensively, we have more capacity,” he told reporters. But when it came time to make a public assertion of Russia’s role in early October, it was made in a written statement from the director of national intelligence and the secretary of homeland security. It was far less dramatic than the president’s appearance in the press room two years before to directly accuse the North Koreans of attacking Sony. The reference in the statement to hackings on “political organizations,” officials now say, encompassed a hacking on data stored by the Republicans as well. Two senior officials say the forensic evidence was accompanied by “human and technical” sources in Russia, which appears to mean that the United States’ implants or taps in Russian computer and phone networks helped confirm the country’s role. But that may not be known for decades, until the secrets are declassified. A week later Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. was sent out to transmit a public warning to Mr. Putin: The United States will retaliate “at the time of our choosing. And under the circumstances that have the greatest impact. ” Later, after Mr. Biden said he was not concerned that Russia could “fundamentally alter the election,” he was asked whether the American public would know if the message to Mr. Putin had been sent. “Hope not,” Mr. Biden responded. Some of his former colleagues think that was the wrong answer. An American counterstrike, said Michael Morell, the former deputy director of the C. I. A. under Mr. Obama, has “got to be overt. It needs to be seen. ” A covert response would significantly limit the deterrence effect, he added. “If you can’t see it, it’s not going to deter the Chinese and North Koreans and Iranians and others. ” The Obama administration says it still has more than 30 days to do exactly that. As the year draws to a close, it now seems possible that there will be multiple investigations of the Russian hacking  —   the intelligence review Mr. Obama has ordered completed by Jan. 20, the day he leaves office, and one or more congressional inquiries. They will wrestle with, among other things, Mr. Putin’s motive. Did he seek to mar the brand of American democracy, to forestall   activism for both Russians and their neighbors? Or to weaken the next American president, since presumably Mr. Putin had no reason to doubt American forecasts that Mrs. Clinton would win easily? Or was it, as the C. I. A. concluded last month, a deliberate attempt to elect Mr. Trump? In fact, the Russian    scheme accomplished all three goals. What seems clear is that Russian hacking, given its success, is not going to stop. Two weeks ago, the German intelligence chief, Bruno Kahl, warned that Russia might target elections in Germany next year. “The perpetrators have an interest to delegitimize the democratic process as such,” Mr. Kahl said. Now, he added, “Europe is in the focus of these attempts of disturbance, and Germany to a particularly great extent. ” But Russia has by no means forgotten its American target. On the day after the presidential election, the cybersecurity company Volexity reported five new waves of phishing emails, evidently from Cozy Bear, aimed at think tanks and nonprofits in the United States. One of them purported to be from Harvard University, attaching a fake paper. Its title: “Why American Elections Are Flawed. ”

0 - Hours before the start of the Women’s March on Washington on Jan. 21, every Metro car leading to the National Mall was packed so tight that it could take on no more riders. At station after station, the train doors would open, and the passengers would look out on throngs of fellow protesters  —   women, men, children, babies, the occasional dog  —   waiting on the platform. As people emerged from underground into the morning air, it was hard to tell where to go, so they found their way by gauging the human density, moving until they reached a spot so full of people that they could no longer move at all. There was an enormous rally happening somewhere in there  —   activists and celebrities speaking into microphones  —   but much of the crowd couldn’t see or hear anything except rumbling waves of cheers. By the time they were meant to march, the crowd was so large that it already stretched across the entire route, from the rally site near the Capitol to the Ellipse near the White House. The signs they carried spoke to any number of issues: immigration, abortion, race, the environment, inequality, the new president. REFUGEES WELCOME, KEEP YOUR LAWS OUT OF MY VAGINA, BLACK LIVES MATTER, SCIENCE IS REAL, FLINT NEEDS CLEAN WATER, NOBODY LIKES YOU. The handmade pink “pussyhats” that many marchers wore  —   a reference to Donald Trump’s    boasts about grabbing unsuspecting women by the genitals  —   had been sneered at in the days before the march. They were called corny, girlie, a waste of time. Seen from above, though, on thousands of marchers, their wave of color created a powerful image. It was, somewhat unexpectedly, one of the largest mass demonstrations in American history. Millions of protesters  —   estimates range from three to five million  —   took to the streets of Washington, Los Angeles, New York, Palm Beach, Fla. Boise, Idaho, even Fargo, N. D. Sister demonstrations were held in Thailand, in Malawi, in Antarctica. The energy of almost every group alarmed or incensed by Trump’s election seemed to have poured into a single demonstration. That it happened on the day after his inauguration was not surprising. What was striking was that all these people had come together under the auspices of a march for women. Just two months earlier, the left did not appear to be a unified front. The polls had barely closed before the infighting began. Some blamed Hillary Clinton for ignoring Wisconsin, or the Democratic National Committee for boxing other candidates out of the primary field. Some blamed identity politics, which made   white voters “feel excluded,” according to Prof. Mark Lilla of Columbia. Others blamed white people, particularly the coastal ones who couldn’t get their heartland relatives on their side. But a crew of   angry women was still aiming its ire at Trump. In the hours after his victory on Nov. 8, Teresa Shook, a retired lawyer in Hawaii, posted to Facebook, suggesting a march on Washington. Some women on the East Coast had the same idea. At first, these suggestions were so impulsive that they seemed almost metaphorical. But within days, tens of thousands of women had pledged to join in. Over the course of two months, the idea became something far bigger than initially imagined. Eventually, an entire organizing team would have permits,   fleets of buses, portable toilets, celebrity sponsors and support from Gloria Steinem. Men meekly asked their female family members and Twitter followers: “Are we allowed to join?” By the middle of January, with the event shaping up to be the   demonstration, the New York magazine writer Jonathan Chait worried that “Women’s March” was too niche an organizing principle  —   it was a “bad name,” he tweeted, a divisive “brand. ” The opposite turned out to be true: Women led the resistance, and everyone followed. A march for women managed to crowd a broad opposition force onto its platform. In the weeks since the march, that energy has only spread. After Trump’s executive order halting travel from seven   countries, the march’s striking proof of concept  —   hit the streets, and a surprising number of others will join you  —   fueled more spontaneous actions in unexpected places: outside courthouses, Trump hotels, airport terminals, the offices of Senator Mitch McConnell. At each protest, you were likely to see a few pink cat ears poking out of the crowd, a reminder of the opposition’s first gathering. It seems unlikely that any other kind of march would have turned out quite this way. In this moment, it happened that “women” was the one tent large enough to contain almost every major strain of protest against Trump. Those who know their feminist history might see a paradox here. The women’s movement has not always been a site for unity. It has been marked just as deeply by its fractures, failures and tensions. But more than a century of internal turmoil has also forced the movement to reckon with its divisions. Now, the question is whether it can bring even more Americans into the fold. Clinton’s loss on Nov. 8 was a pivotal,   moment in the course of the American women’s movement. In an evening, the   first female president was shoved to the side by what a sizable chunk of the nation saw as that classic historical figure: the male chauvinist pig. In parts of the popular imagination, it wasn’t just a loss for Clinton or for the Democratic Party. It was a repudiation of feminism itself. But Clinton has always been a wary avatar of feminism. In 2008, she didn’t run for president as a “women’s candidate” if anything, she campaigned with her sex in the closet and the strategist Mark Penn advising her to harden her image into an American Iron Lady. “They do not want someone who would be the first mama,” he wrote in one memo. Years later, HBO’s “Veep” would satirize that posture through its own fictional politician. “I can’t identify myself as a woman!” she tells her staff. “People can’t know that. Men hate that. And women who hate women hate that, which I believe is most women. ” In the eight years between Clinton’s first and second presidential campaigns, though, something shifted: Feminism became fashionable. By the start of the Obama era, incisive women’s blogs like Jezebel and Feministing had already hit the web and started throwing popcorn at the big screen of American culture, covering the same topics that women’s magazines did  —   fashion, movies, sex  —   but taking on the women’s magazines too. By Obama’s second term, this model had thrived and multiplied so many times over that even a   of the sports website Bleacher Report started his own women’s site, Bustle. Soon enough, no corner of culture was safe from a feminist critique, from Christmas songs to “manspreading. ” Pop stars  —   people like Lady Gaga, Katy Perry and Taylor Swift  —   were asked if they were feminists, and if they shied away from the label, outrage would greet them online. Feminism became increasingly popular, but in a very specific way  —   one attuned to the concerns of people with office jobs and time to spend online. The feminist priorities of this new media landscape tended to involve topics that   women would experience firsthand: reproductive rights, catcalling, campus rape, professional opportunity,   representation. The writers setting its tone tended to be young women who were asked to produce large amounts of clickable copy, for not much money, in very little time, exploring feminist issues not through   reporting but through “takes” on the women already making news: the   balance of Yahoo’s chief executive, Marissa Mayer the pay gap between Jennifer Lawrence and her male  . Some content chased sexist slights down to the most passing personal concerns, like an item from The Huffington Post that sighed: “There is no proper way for a woman to cut her hair, let alone do anything right in this world. ” It’s not that women’s activist groups vanished or political organizing stalled. But it did become possible for an American woman to cultivate a relationship to feminism that was primarily consumerist: There were feminist TV shows to watch, feminist celebrities to follow, feminist clothes to buy. Unlike many other major social movements, women’s liberation dovetails neatly with an important advertising demographic, a lesson capitalism absorbed more than a century ago. In 1908, the advertiser J. Walter Thompson hired suffragists to address the growing women’s market. Over the next decades, the industry would slip women’s rights messaging into ad copy. Old Dutch Cleanser offered “freedom from household drudgery” Shredded Wheat promised a “declaration of independence” from cooking. These days, even our bath products have achieved empowerment. Ads for Secret deodorant nudge us to ask for a raise, and those for Always prompt us to challenge stereotypes about girls. Dove wants us to feel beautiful at any size. It’s telling which strand of feminism these brands have deemed marketable: the one that doubles as  . This is a vision of feminism in which the primary thing that needs to change is a woman’s frame of mind. Something similar happened to the pop stars who once hesitated to call themselves feminists  —   they came around to feminism by redefining feminism around themselves. To Lady Gaga, feminism was about protecting “the integrity of women who are ambitious. ” Taylor Swift realized, she said, that she had “been taking a feminist stance without actually saying so. ” Feminism was being defined down to its most benign interpretation. It was less a political platform than a brand identity. In 2013, “Lean In,” by Sheryl Sandberg, raised this   subtext to the level of text. Sandberg called the book “sort of a feminist manifesto,” but it preached individual solutions to systemic problems, encouraging women to focus on “internal obstacles” and “dismantle the hurdles in ourselves. ” This feminist mode, where personal success becomes synonymous with social progress, can be plugged into any number of political orientations. The latest model for the   feminist brand is Ivanka Trump, who has built a lifestyle company under the hashtag #WomenWhoWork. A recent pitch neatly weds activist language with shoppable solutions: “We’re committed to solving problems. If we can’t find a solution, we’ll make it ourselves (case in point: the Soho Tote, the ultimate work bag). ” By the time the 2016 campaign rolled around, Clinton wasn’t just permitted to run as a feminist  —   she was practically obligated to. Her messaging shifted accordingly. Years of women’s debating the right way to be a feminist had the side effect of forcing the first female   candidate to the left. In 2008, she argued that she wanted abortion to be “safe, legal and rare  —   and by rare I mean rare. ” In last year’s debates, she stopped qualifying her support. “I will defend Planned Parenthood,” she said in one. “I will defend Roe v. Wade, and I will defend women’s rights to make their own health care decisions. ” Meanwhile, her campaign mimicked the aesthetics of the   feminist mode. The candidate affirmed her feminism in a video interview with Lena Dunham, posed in a Kim Kardashian selfie and made a cameo on “Broad City. ” Her campaign posted a   listicle informing Latinos that Clinton was “just like your abuela. ” (With the Twitter hashtag #NotMyAbuela, those voters begged to differ.) Her site sold embroidered pillows that said “A Woman’s Place Is in the White House” and a   with a big “YAAAS, HILLARY!” printed over her senior portrait from high school. After Trump accused her of playing “the woman’s card,” her campaign introduced a free   “Official Hillary for America Woman Card” that drove more than $2 million in donations within days. One young woman earnestly prodded her at an Iowa campaign event: “If you could choose, would you rather be the president or Beyoncé?” Pop feminism, having been washed of its political urgency, was now being integrated back into politics at the highest level. The candidate who once shrank from feminism was positioning herself as an icon of the movement. Her image became closely aligned with two metaphors  —   the pantsuit and the glass ceiling  —   that speak to a particular kind of woman: a corporate careerist at the top of her field. A “secret” Facebook group, Pantsuit Nation, popped up to encourage Clinton supporters to wear pantsuits to the polls. When she clinched the Democratic nomination for president last June  —   the one she would formally accept the following month, dressed in suffragist white  —   Clinton called back to the Seneca Falls convention of 1848, where “a small but determined group of women, and men, came together with the idea that women deserved equal rights. ” The feminist project started there, she implied  —   and she was going to finish it. When Clinton lost, pop feminism suffered a crisis. As everyone pored over exit polls, some of the   fractures between different groups of women exploded into view.   percent of black women voted for Clinton, but 53 percent of white women voted for Trump, perhaps more likely to see themselves in his vision of the world than in the pop feminism that fed Clinton’s campaign. Despite Trump’s palpable, eminently bloggable disrespect for women  —   and that infamous tape  —   he had successfully courted a faction of female voters. His win suggested that Americans were more comfortable with misogyny than many had thought, but it also burst the bubble of cheery pop feminism, which had achieved its huge popularity at the expense of class consciousness and racial solidarity. In some places, you could watch the mood turn in a matter of days. The Pantsuit Nation Facebook group ceased its celebrations and became a site for sharing stories of pain and resilience. But when the group’s founder, a Maine educator named Libby Chamberlain, announced a plan to channel the power of the group in real life, it wasn’t exactly a call to activism  —   it was a   book. “You are a force, Pantsuit Nation,” she wrote. “Let’s see if we can harness that force within the pages of a book and see it on night stands and coffee tables all around the world. ” The idea brought on a revolt. “The N. R. A. with its five million members has a stranglehold on Congress,” one commenter wrote. “Pantsuit Nation has four million members and decides its main mission is ‘storytelling’ and now, selling books. What a colossal waste. ” But for some outside observers, this was a productive comeuppance. Rhon   an associate professor of Africana studies at Williams College in Massachusetts, published “An Open Letter to White Liberal Feminists,” on the website Black Perspectives, expressing her disappointment that it had taken Donald Trump to shake them into her reality. “I am delighted that you have received the potential awakening of a lifetime, and that now you might actually get what so many of us have been describing all along,” she wrote. “Welcome to that deep perpetual angst. Embrace it, and allow it to motivate you to a deeper form of action. ” In those same November weeks, the nascent    project was navigating its own identity crisis. Some of the early organizers had    jobs  —   pastry chef, yoga instructor. One of the women, Bob Bland, a fashion designer, had amassed a small online following by designing “NASTY WOMAN” and “BAD HOMBRE”   and selling them online. “I had this whole network of ‘nasty women’ and ‘bad hombres,’’u2009” she told me. “After the election, they were looking to me like, ‘What are we going to do next? ’’u2009” Disparate organizers convened around a Facebook event announcing a Million Women March. There was one major problem with this: In 1997, activists organized a Million Woman March in Philadelphia to address the particular concerns of black women. When this new march on Washington unwittingly chose a very similar name, it crystallized the idea that the nascent movement was being run by a handful of white women with no organizing history. Comments began pouring in from all sides. The organizers had stumbled into a conflict that has dogged women’s organizing from the very beginning: Of all the tensions that have coursed through the women’s movement, none has ever been quite so pronounced as the one between white and black women. Consider what happened when Sojourner Truth showed up at a women’s rights convention in Ohio in 1851. Frances Gage, the woman running the show, recalled the scene 12 years later: “The leaders of the movement trembled on seeing a tall, gaunt black woman in a gray dress and white turban, surmounted with an uncouth sunbonnet, march deliberately into the church, walk with the air of a queen up the aisle and take her seat upon the pulpit steps. ” A “buzz of disapprobation” spread through the church. White women in attendance complained that a black woman’s testimony would distract from the convention’s focus. “Don’t let her speak, Mrs. Gage  —   it will ruin us,” one said. “Every newspaper in the land will have our cause mixed up with abolition and niggers, and we shall be utterly denounced. ” Throughout the convention, men arrived to speak out against women’s suffrage. Women, they said, were too weak and helpless to be trusted with the power of the vote. Because “there were very few women in those days who dared to ‘speak in meeting,’’u2009” as Gage put it, their points went unchallenged until Truth stepped forward. White women hissed, but Truth’s very identity nullified the arguments coming from both men and women in attendance. “That man over there says that women need to be helped into carriages, and lifted over ditches, and to have the best place everywhere,” she said. “Nobody ever helps me into carriages, or over mud puddles, or gives me any best place. And ain’t I a woman? Look at me! Look at my arm!” She rolled up her sleeve to the shoulder. “I have plowed and planted, and gathered into barns, and no man could head me. And ain’t I a woman?” In that moment, Truth shattered an idea of white femininity that had been used to both underpin and undermine the cause of suffrage. As a slave, she had worked in the fields like a man as a free black woman, she could not rely on the offerings of white male gentility. Gage wrote that Truth’s testimony compelled the white women in attendance to embrace her “with streaming eyes, and hearts beating with gratitude. ” But two years later, Truth still drew jeers from white crowds when she attended women’s meetings. A vision of whiteness was ingrained in the leaders and the arguments of the mainstream movement. Even the suffragists’ signature white clothes were deliberately chosen to signal purity. This ideal of feminine virtue did not extend to black women, or   ones. Some suffragists made their racism and classism explicit. In 1894, a white woman at a meeting of the Brooklyn Woman Suffrage Association complained that New York had become an “asylum for the trash of all nations,” arguing that women’s suffrage ought to be restricted. “Think what it means to give it to all women,” she said. “Our criminal and pauper men have wives there are thousands of female operatives in tobacco factories and similar fields of labor there are probably two million Negro women in this country who are but little uplifted above the plane of animals. ” One curious point of this history is that so many suffragists came from the antislavery movement. Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony, whose partnership would come to define the suffrage movement in the United States, started their activist careers as abolitionists. But after the Civil War, as black men and all women agitated for the right to vote, a political battle broke out over who would be enfranchised first. (Either way, black women would be last.) In 1865, Stanton lamented having to “stand aside to see ‘Sambo’ walk into the kingdom first,” as she put it in The National   Standard. Over time, these racial contours would harden into lasting institutions. When women’s social clubs spread across the United States at the turn of the century, two models emerged.   clubs leveraged   women’s leisure time to campaign for social reforms. Black women, who largely worked outside the home, came together around urgent needs. One of the first actions of the black Chicago Women’s Club was to raise money to prosecute a police officer who killed a black man. The main distinction between clubs, the black activist Fannie Barrier Williams wrote, was that for black women, “it is not a fad. ” Black women distinguished themselves not only as suffragists but also as vocal critics of a movement that pushed one kind of justice aside in pursuit of another. In 1913, when thousands of suffragists marched on Washington to agitate for the vote, black women were instructed to march in the back. Ida B. Wells defied the order and marched with the delegation from Illinois, her home state. She wasn’t just protesting for her right to vote. She was protesting the protest too. This dynamic is not only a thing of distant history: In the thick of feminism’s second wave, women were often still divided along lines of identity. In 1967, as the   author Betty Friedan called the first meeting of the New York chapter of the National Organization for Women, she found herself at odds with a black activist and lawyer named Flo Kennedy, who pushed the women around her to make common cause with the antiwar and Black Power movements. Friedan and the meeting’s host  —   Muriel Fox, the   female executive at the world’s largest   agency  —   were not pleased. As Kennedy put it in her memoirs, they “went bonkers. ” Friedan’s 1963 book, “The Feminine Mystique,” had been an awakening for a class of white, married,   women, and she pictured herself as the leader of what she called a “mainstream” feminist movement. When women at one 1970 march offered her a lavender armband to wear in solidarity with a NOW member recently attacked for her bisexuality, Friedan dropped it on the ground, furious at the attempt to add gay rights to her program. Kennedy continually pushed in the opposite direction, trying to build bridges between feminist groups and other movements. At one point, Friedan admonished her to leave the feminist movement alone and “focus her attention on matters of Black Power. ” As the second wave matured, black women found themselves continually calling on it to consider a new approach, one that acknowledged the different needs of different women. As the black feminist and leftist Barbara Smith told the National Women’s Studies Association in 1979, any feminism that didn’t account for the specific concerns of black women, poor women, disabled women, lesbians and others was not really feminism  —   it was “merely female  . ” There has never been one women’s movement. It’s difficult, for example, to say that the American feminist project started in Seneca Falls, N. Y. in 1848, because black women were not invited to that convention. It’s hard to say that electing a woman as president would have been feminism’s crowning achievement, because the success of one woman does not naturally trickle down to all. The history of the women’s movement is one of warring factions and sharp  . But its 150 years of navigating internal disputes put it in a position to lead what seemed, at the end of last fall, like a highly divided left. “It’s embarrassing to me now to say it, but I didn’t know the term ‘intersectionality’ when we started,” Bob Bland, the Women’s March   told me. Now she deployed it often to emphasize the growing diversity of the march. She told various reporters that she had met women working “in so many different intersectionalities” and hoped to reach a “a wide intersectionality of people” in a march that reflected “all of the different intersections of human rights. ” That magic word comes from a 1989 paper by the legal scholar Kimberlé Crenshaw that was published in The University of Chicago Legal Forum. Crenshaw had studied cases in which black women sued their employers for what appeared to be “compound discrimination”  —   both racial and gender biases. But they were often told they lacked legal standing: Laws protected them from discrimination as   or as women, but not specifically as black women. Crenshaw used a traffic metaphor to describe the interlocking forms of oppression a person might face. Cars flowed through an intersection in all directions when an accident happened, it could be caused by cars from any number of sides, or even all sides. That metaphor would be plucked from Crenshaw’s paper and grow in resonance over the next two decades, until “intersectionality” became a rallying cry  —   the main point of rhetorical resistance against the tide of   feminist conversation. Even beneath the shiny surface of   pop feminism, dissenters took countless shots at its racial cluelessness, its lack of   its sometimes shallow concerns. Women of color convened on Twitter under hashtags like #SolidarityIsForWhiteWomen to detail their experiences of being sidelined in feminist conversations, and many on the left criticized the way a     feminism was becoming popular just as income inequality between women was ballooning. (It’s hard to “lean in” to a job cleaning hotel rooms.) In recent years, intersectionality even popped up in People. com, on Bustle and in a tweet from Clinton. Often the criticism that lies behind this word is brushed off, met with defensiveness, taken personally. (As the founder of Pantsuit Nation wrote to critics of her book deal: “This is not the place for divisiveness. ”) Women turn to feminism because they want to stand up and say something it can be jarring for them be told to sit down and listen to someone else. But the concept became a useful tool for the march on Washington, which set about the task of uniting feminism’s mainstream, popular arm and its dissenting factions  —   all in the space of two months. Soon after the suggestion to march raced across the web, Vanessa Wruble  —   a white producer and   of the media company OkayAfrica  —   made a pivotal intervention in its planning. “I thought the stakes were so high,” she told me. “It needed to be an inclusive movement, or it was going to be a total disaster. I felt that it could damage the country. ” At this critical moment, with the march quickly ballooning into something bigger than the initial organizers could handle on their own, Wruble reached out and urged them to drop the name Million Women March. Then she linked them up with her network, and soon three seasoned activists  —   Carmen Perez, Linda Sarsour and Tamika Mallory  —   got on board. These women hadn’t necessarily supported Clinton, and they didn’t necessarily identify as feminists. But they had experience organizing in communities of color and saw the march as an opportunity to reach a large new audience. When Sarsour got the call, she had just posted a comment on the march’s Facebook page: “Can you include Muslim women and Muslim communities in the list?” The three women  —   one Chicana Latina, one   one black  —   met through their involvement in Justice League NYC, a   initiative. In 2015, they organized a   march from New York to Washington, ending in a rally at the Capitol that drew a small crowd. Now hundreds of thousands of women whose previous interest in justice may have been abstract at best were turning to them for leadership. The question, Perez told me, was “How do we get them to understand that their liberation is bound with ours?” Meanwhile, the three had some catching up to do with the mainstream feminist perspective. “I don’t have a lot of what I would consider to be deep, transformative relationships with white women,” Sarsour told me. “I’ve been learning a lot,” she said, and working toward becoming “more comfortable around this movement of feminism that I always felt didn’t particularly include Muslim women. ” The organizers appeared on the   radio morning show “The Breakfast Club” and loaded their Instagram page with black feminist heroes. But they also posed for windswept photos in Vogue, and some dropped by the Wing, a private Manhattan women’s club with a $2, 250 annual membership fee. Their rally put Angela Davis on the same stage as Scarlett Johansson. When I called Kimberlé Crenshaw in January, she had just returned home to Los Angeles from the march on Washington, where she walked with a group of women from the African American Policy Forum. Her group was so far back in the crowd that they couldn’t hear the rally, and “I’m kind of glad about it,” she told me. “We were in this sea of humanity. ” Wading through the crowd, she said, “I saw all the different issues and people that had found their way under the banner of the Women’s March. It was the embodiment of the intersectional sensibilities that a lot of us have been working on for a very long time. ” The women’s movement’s tendency toward a singular perspective is “not an exceptional problem for feminism,” Crenshaw told me. “Patriarchy works in such a way that these critiques never even surface in a lot of movements led by men. This conversation isn’t always happening in other spaces. And if the conversation leads to more robust ways of thinking about women, feminism and social justice, it can be a very good thing. ” “The   question is: Can these feminisms live together under an   banner?” Crenshaw said. “It happened for 24 hours all across the world. ” When I made my way back to my hotel after the march, the cheers of the crowd fading into the distance, I opened my laptop and saw a different version of what I had just seen in person. Now it was all filtered through my own   bubble  —   that of a   white woman who lives in Brooklyn. Facebook’s trending topics, tailored to fulfill each user’s particular online habits, served me up a   version of the day’s events. It pointed me toward the speeches of Scarlett Johansson and Madonna, and nobody else. As scenes of the march traveled through the media and across the web, the story spun out in even more directions. Twitter lit up with notes of internal dissent and snapshots of signs from the march: DON’T FORGET: WHITE WOMEN VOTED FOR TRUMP and BLACK WOMEN TRIED TO SAVE Y’ALL and I’LL SEE YOU NICE WHITE LADIES AT THE NEXT #BLACKLIVESMATTER MARCH, RIGHT? But for the moment, at least, Trump appears to be the great uniter. In the days and weeks since the march, its energy spilled into spontaneous actions across the country, with protesters coming together on behalf of Muslims and immigrants. Donations poured into Planned Parenthood and the American Civil Liberties Union. Congressional switchboards were inundated with calls. When The Washington Post polled Americans   it registered a huge shift in energy among Democrats, especially Democratic women, 40 percent of whom said they planned to get more involved in activism. But liberals are not the only ones drawing inspiration from the protests. Flip to Fox News, click around conservative blogs or browse   Twitter, and you can watch the demonstrations fuel a different kind of opposition narrative. After the march, Fox News set clips of rally speeches to foreboding music. Breitbart published photos with the headline “See what a massive, Hillary shaped bullet America just dodged?” The   Media Research Center aggregated the most “vile and ridiculous signs. ” Twitter exploded with   attacks on Linda Sarsour, who was called a “terrorist” who “loves ISIS. ” When the annual March for Life hit the Mall to demonstrate against abortion rights, The Blaze called it “the real women’s march. ” (The Women’s March did, at one point, remove the name of an   group from its list of partners, after an uproar.) According to Public Policy Polling, 48 percent of Trump voters think the protesters who convened at airports to protest the travel ban were paid by George Soros. Trump tweeted recently: “Professional anarchists, thugs and paid protesters are proving the point of the millions of people who voted to MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!” In the first weeks of the Trump administration, the factions that split over his election are deepening along the same lines. Each side seems oddly confident in its political position. Trump supporters call themselves “the silent majority,” while his critics identify as the “popular vote. ” When I called Eleanor Smeal, a   of the Feminist Majority Foundation, and asked her whether the organization had any plans to reach out to the 53 percent of white women who voted for Trump, her response was to question the margin of error in the polls. “We don’t really know if we lost the majority or not, and I believe that we did not,” she told me. “I think they’re with us. ” For now, the factions of the left seem to have found an accord. But to regain any power in Washington, they will need to sway the center too  —   including some of those women who voted for Trump. The white women of the left, many of whom are just now finding their footing as activists, have been eager to dissociate from that group. Mention the 53 percent, and they’re quick to tell you that they’re of the 47. But of all the people who marched on Washington last month, they may be among the best positioned to reach across that aisle. “I know of no other time when it would be more important,” Barbara Smith, the black feminist and leftist, told me. “That’s not my work to do, but somebody ought to do it. ”

0 - WASHINGTON  —   Only weeks after 70 million Americans chose a black man for president, shattering a racial barrier that had stood for the entirety of the nation’s   history, no one in the White House, especially the man in the Oval Office, wanted to talk about race. President Obama had made a pragmatic calculation in January 2009, as the financial crisis drove communities across the United States toward economic collapse. Whatever he did for   whose neighborhoods were suffering more than others, he would not describe as efforts to specifically help Black America. Mr. Obama made the decision knowing how powerfully his election had raised the hopes of    —   and knowing that no matter what he did, it would not be seen as enough. “I remember thinking, ‘They are going to hate us one day,’” said Melody Barnes, who is black and served as Mr. Obama’s first domestic policy adviser, recalling her sadness when she stood in an auditorium in those early months as a crowd cheered for the success of the new president. “I knew that we couldn’t do everything that people wanted to meet those expectations. ” The fear inside the West Wing was that promoting a “black agenda” and aiming programs directly at   at a time of widespread economic anxiety would provoke a white backlash  —   the kind that, years later, White House officials would view as helping to elect Donald J. Trump. “At a minimum, that would have been tone deaf,” said Eric H. Holder Jr. who served as the nation’s first   attorney general during much of Mr. Obama’s presidency, “and at worst, would have created a reaction in the larger community that would have prevented the things you wanted to do. ” Mr. Obama, who had grown up straddling two worlds as the son of a black man from Kenya and a white woman from Kansas, wanted to be the president of all America. Framing his efforts in racial terms could exacerbate something that was already simmering, he thought. “The most important thing I can do is to lift the economy over all,” Mr. Obama told reporters in the summer of 2009 when he was asked about doing more to help   recover economically. But over the next seven and a half years, racial tensions across the country forced Mr. Obama to abandon his early reticence on race again and again. Ultimately he led a national conversation on race ignited by spasms of violence  —   police shootings and protests in Florida, South Carolina, Missouri and elsewhere. Inside the White House, aides recall them as among his most painful moments as president. “After my election there was talk of a   America,” Mr. Obama said in his farewell speech on Tuesday in Chicago, reflecting on the threat that racial strife poses for the country’s democratic ideals. “Such a vision, however well intended, was never realistic. Race remains a potent and often divisive force in our society. ” After he leaves office, Mr. Obama will continue that conversation in work for My Brother’s Keeper and other programs to help black youths. There is plenty to do. As much as his   presidency has inspired and empowered   black unemployment is still about double that for whites. Nearly a quarter of blacks are living in poverty, almost the same as in 1976. “He made it seem like everything was all good, and it’s not,” said Thelonious Stokes, 21, a black artist whose experiences of being racially profiled in Chicago left him jaded about the state of race relations. “We almost needed Trump to show the true state of America. ” Mr. Obama’s earliest public reflection about race as president backfired. Asked about a black Harvard professor, Henry Louis Gates Jr. a friend of Mr. Obama’s who was arrested in July 2009 trying to enter his own house by a white officer, Mr. Obama immediately took sides. “It is fair to say,” the president said six days after the arrest at a   news conference, “that the Cambridge police acted stupidly. ” Those words  —   and the frenzied reaction to them  —   helped deepen the caution about racial issues inside the White House. For days, the president’s critique of the arresting officer dominated the news and the morning staff meetings in the West Wing. Robert Gibbs, the press secretary, was especially agitated, his colleagues recalled, and argued that the White House had to do something to change the subject. Mr. Gibbs succeeded in pushing for what the news media quickly labeled a “beer summit” on the edge of the Rose Garden in the White House, where Mr. Gates and the arresting officer, Sgt. James Crowley, joined Mr. Obama over beer for a discussion. “It had to be cauterized in a way that it would stop leading the news,” Valerie Jarrett, Mr. Obama’s closest adviser, conceded. Professor Gates, for one, was pleased. “I don’t think anybody but Barack Obama would have thought about bringing us together,” he said at the time. As a candidate for president in 2008, Mr. Obama had drawn praise for confronting racial divisions during a powerful speech he delivered about his former pastor, the Rev. Jeremiah A. Wright Jr. who had characterized the United States as fundamentally racist and the government as corrupt. “The profound mistake of Reverend Wright’s sermons is not that he spoke about racism in our society. It’s that he spoke as if our society was static as if no progress had been made,” Mr. Obama said that March day in Philadelphia, urging people to move beyond old racial wounds. “Let us be our brother’s keeper, Scripture tells us. Let us be our sister’s keeper. Let us find that common stake we all have in one another, and let our politics reflect that spirit as well. ” But the beer summit was deeply disturbing to many of the president’s   advisers, who thought he should not have backed down. The officer had acted stupidly, they thought, and the nation’s first black president ought to be able to say so. The meeting “was demeaning and diminished his leadership and his voice at that moment,” one of them recalled, asking for anonymity to bluntly discuss the topic. “People thought we were being punked. I got so many emails, so many phone calls from people I respected: ‘He was right. Why are you backpedaling? ’” Inside the West Wing, the impact was clear. Mr. Obama would have to be more cautious when it came to racial issues, particularly ahead of the 2012   campaign. The issue of race was too divisive at a time when Mr. Obama needed to emphasize inclusion. “What it did teach us is that you just have to be careful about the words that you choose,” Ms. Jarrett said. “It doesn’t mean you shy away from issues that arise that deal with race, just as he didn’t shy away from Reverend Wright. But you have to be sensitive to a long history of people reacting strongly to the topic. ” Outside the White House, people noticed, too: “He plainly arrested him because he was black,” said Edward G. Robinson Sr. who is black and works at a box factory in Cleveland. Mr. Obama “backtracked because he wanted to be everybody’s president. ” Like others, Mr. Robinson said the president was met with racially motivated disrespect in Washington, and pointed to the moment when a white Republican lawmaker yelled, “You lie!” at the president during a congressional address. The White House would go on to publish reports about its efforts to help   including details about the impact that the Affordable Care Act was having to help poor blacks. But Mr. Obama rarely talked about race publicly during the next few years. The president’s voice was shaking with emotion. “If I had a son he would look like Trayvon Martin,” Mr. Obama told Ms. Jarrett and David Plouffe, his senior adviser and former campaign manager, as the three talked in the Oval Office about what the president should say publicly about the death of the      at the hands of a neighborhood watch volunteer in Florida. “I am going to say that. ” It was March 2012, nearly three years after the beer summit. The specter of that meeting still hovered and Mr. Obama was, in a sense, taking sides again. But in personalizing the shooting, his aides recalled, Mr. Obama’s hope was that people might view   boys differently if they saw Trayvon through the president’s own eyes. Mr. Obama headed out to the Rose Garden, announced his nomination of a new World Bank president, then took the question from a reporter that everyone knew was coming: “Can you comment on the Trayvon Martin case, sir?” Mr. Obama called it a tragedy, said he was glad the Justice Department was looking into it, reflected on how the nation was doing necessary soul searching and then concluded: “But my main message is to the parents of Trayvon Martin. If I had a son, he’d look like Trayvon. ’’ Moments after Mr. Obama returned to the Oval Office, Gene Sperling, one of his top economic advisers, stopped by with tears in his eyes. “You can’t imagine what that will mean to my son,” Mr. Sperling, who is white and is married to an   woman, told the president, according to a colleague who was there at the time. This time, the president’s comments were embraced by many outside the White House, too. Media reports focused on the emotion Mr. Obama had displayed  —   rare for a politician whose usual demeanor was cool and professorial. “For him to say things like that in front of the entire country and the world, I think sends a strong message to people,” Ryan Shultz, 33, an art teacher in Chicago who is white, said in a recent interview. But others viewed the president’s comments that day as a continuing affront to police officers and a saw in them a willingness to take sides in the racial debate. For at least one person, it went further. Dylann S. Roof, the white supremacist who killed nine parishioners in Charleston, S. C. in 2015, later said he was inspired to kill because of media coverage of Trayvon’s shooting. “Crime is still bad and police are still shooting black people left and right,” Mr. Shultz said. “I live in Chicago  —   a murder capital of the United States  —   and it’s crazy and it hasn’t gotten that much better, I don’t think. ” Michael Brown, an unarmed black teenager, was shot and killed by Darren Wilson, a white police officer, in Ferguson, Mo. shortly after noon on Aug. 9, 2014. Only minutes before, Mr. Obama had arrived on Martha’s Vineyard for his summer vacation, which would soon be dominated by how to respond to the racial violence that Mr. Brown’s death unleashed. The president and his aides, including Mr. Holder and Ms. Jarrett, who were also vacationing on the island, made urgent calls to Missouri’s governor, state police officials and civil rights leaders. They debated whether Mr. Obama should go to Ferguson, and decided against it, knowing that a presidential visit would be disruptive. Mr. Holder would go instead. But the more urgent question for the three of them was how to weigh in. The president was wary of putting his thumb on the scale in a case destined to be investigated by the federal authorities. But it was just as clear that tensions between the police and   were increasing  —   not only in Ferguson, but also around the country. If Mr. Obama wasn’t the right person to step into that issue, who was? “You want to try to calm the situation,” Mr. Holder said, recalling the discussions he had with the president and Ms. Jarrett about what to say. “You want to reassure the community that an investigation will be done and done fully. But you want to make sure that the people in law enforcement know it is done fairly. ” “There was that trust gap,” he added. “That was something that had to be dealt with. ” As the violence worsened, Mr. Holder, Mr. Obama and Ms. Jarrett concluded that the president needed to denounce the violence  —   and at the same time criticize the police for their conduct during the protests. “There is never an excuse for violence against police or for those who would use this tragedy as a cover for vandalism or looting,” the president said in a televised statement on Aug. 14 from Edgartown, Mass. But he added, “There’s also no excuse for police to use excessive force against peaceful protests or to throw protesters in jail for lawfully exercising their First Amendment rights. ” For the rest of his presidency, Mr. Obama would strive for the balance he struck in his remarks that day: empathy and understanding for   and support for the police and the rule of law. But however he weighed in, the events in Ferguson made clear that he could no longer hang back and instead had to lead a national debate about race, violence and unity. “Once it was so in America’s face, police brutality, it blew the circuit,” said Bill Burton, an   who served as deputy White House press secretary during the first term. “It made it possible to have that conversation that our country had actively not been having. ” Inevitably, Mr. Obama’s striving for balance often left him vilified by both sides. Jim Pasco, the executive director of the Fraternal Order of Police, rebuked Mr. Obama for not being “helpful” in discussing police tactics from his vacation. Years later, Mr. Pasco told NPR that the president often struck the wrong tone when he talked about race and policing. “The president has never been a police officer. He’s never walked in a police officer’s shoes,” Mr. Pasco said last July. “There’s kind of a breakdown in communication more than there is a breakdown in insincerity or intent. ” Ja’Mal Green, a    Black Lives Matter activist based in Chicago, said he thought Mr. Obama “ignored” the calls of organizers for federal policy and funding aimed at stopping police brutality. Mr. Green said he also grew tired of hearing Mr. Obama couple his grief for families in racially charged shooting episodes with statements supporting white police officers. “He is trying to walk a neutral line and he wants to please both sides,” Mr. Green said. “He wants to please black people and then he wants to please police supporters and police officers and police unions. But sometimes you have to pick a side in situations. You need to pick your time when you fight for home or you’ll just have everybody hating you. ’” Mr. Stokes, the    artist from Chicago, felt similarly disappointed. “Chicago is the exact same,” Mr. Stokes said. “He simply opened up, maybe, a lane for young men like me to just maybe be accepted a little bit more to people that don’t accept educated black people. But that’s it, literally. White America is still running everything, and that means that nothing is changing. ” Less than a year after Mr. Brown’s death in Ferguson, on June 17, 2015, nine   parishioners, including a pastor, were gunned down by a    white supremacist during a church meeting in Charleston. Two days later, the victims’ families addressed Mr. Roof, the gunman, at a court hearing, where one by one they forgave him. “You took something very precious away from me,” Nadine Collier, the daughter of    Ethel Lance, told Mr. Roof, as her voice rose in anguish. “I will never talk to her ever again. I will never be able to hold her again. But I forgive you. And have mercy on your soul. ” It was an extraordinary scene, broadcast live on television, which moved many who saw it to tears. Mr. Obama was traveling and did not see it in real time, but when Eric Schultz, the deputy press secretary, read Ms. Collier’s words out loud to Mr. Obama on Marine One, the presidential helicopter, the president was awed by what he heard. “He said, ‘That’s what we need to recognize here, the ability of people to forgive on the worst day of their lives.’ It really struck him,” Ms Jarrett recalled. “We sat there and talked about it on the helicopter. About that quality, the amazing grace. ” Later, in the Oval Office, Mr. Obama struggled with his chief speechwriter, Cody Keenan, to come up with the right words for a eulogy for the Rev. Clementa C. Pinckney, the pastor of the Charleston church and a friend of the president’s. “I’ve got nothing to say,” Mr. Keenan told Mr. Obama, according to Ms. Jarrett. “You’ve said everything that one could possibly say on the subject. ” Eventually, the president decided that instead of talking about guns he would talk about what black churches stood for and the meaning of grace. “It would be a betrayal of everything Reverend Pinckney stood for, I believe, if we allowed ourselves to slip into a comfortable silence again,” the president told a hushed audience at the memorial service. “Once the eulogies have been delivered, once the TV cameras move on, to go back to business as usual  —   that’s what we so often do to avoid uncomfortable truths about the prejudice that still infects our society. To settle for symbolic gestures without following up with the hard work of more lasting change  —   that’s how we lose our way again. ” The week before, during a podcast interview with Marc Maron, the comedian, Mr. Obama had caused a minor stir by using the word “nigger” in answering a question about race relations. He knew it would cause a ripple, an aide with him recalled, but he shrugged. At the beginning of his term, the podcast could have caused a fury and Mr. Obama might have pulled back again. But events in the country  —   especially the deaths of young black men  —   had given him more opportunities to engage the topic. Mr. Pinckney’s funeral was one of them. “He’s not going to just whistle in the wind,” Ms. Jarrett said. “He’s looking for a chance to talk to people when they are ready to hear him. He doesn’t ignore moments. ” One of those moments came this past May. Mr. Obama had a little more than eight months left in office, and he had already said plenty about race. But as he headed to deliver the 2016 commencement address at Howard University, the historically black college in Washington, Mr. Obama said he had something he wanted to add. It was a message to young   the ones who wanted to protest the injustices they saw around them. The president had invited some of them to the White House to talk with him about their cause, and in a few cases, they refused the invitation. People close to him said that made him burn. “You can be completely right, and you still are going to have to engage folks who disagree with you,” Mr. Obama told the students that day, speaking more to members of the Black Lives Matter movement than to the graduates before him. Being “as uncompromising as possible, you will feel good about yourself, you will enjoy a certain moral purity, but you’re not going to get what you want. ” For the president, a onetime community organizer in Chicago, it was a crucial distinction. Mr. Obama had tilted against the powerful and connected  —   he called his time as an organizer “the best education I ever had, better than anything I got at Harvard Law School. ” His approach had always been more strategic than confrontational and foreshadowed his cautious, meticulous attitude in the White House. In the speech, Mr. Obama recalled working as a young Illinois state senator to fight racial profiling, not by calling the police racist, but by sitting down and negotiating a new law. “So we engaged and we listened, and we kept working until we built consensus,” he said. By the time he became president, people close to Mr. Obama said, he was frustrated by the idea that young activists would view themselves as tainted if they came into the White House to talk to him. In the speech, he urged the young protesters not to give in to the idea that the system is rigged. “That will lead to more cynicism, and less participation, and a downward spiral of more injustice and more anger and more despair,” he said. “And that’s never been the source of our progress. That’s how we cheat ourselves of progress. ” “Listen,” he told the students. “Engage. If the other side has a point, learn from them. If they’re wrong, rebut them. Teach them. ” Mr. Obama has told people that he avoided framing his early White House efforts in overtly racial terms because he wanted to avoid a white backlash  —   but acknowledges that he got one anyway. Still, the president repeatedly tells crowds like the students at Howard that race relations are better since he graduated from college. “To deny how far we’ve come would do a disservice to the cause of justice, to the legions of foot soldiers,” he told them last May. Two days after the 2016 election, Mr. Obama took his own advice about engaging adversaries by sitting down in the Oval Office for 90 minutes with Mr. Trump. Many in his party were still in shock about the election’s results, and wanted to see fury from their president. Instead, he offered a hand. In Atlanta, Latonda Henderson, a    marketing consultant, watched Mr. Obama’s meeting with Mr. Trump with admiration as the president she loved sat down with the man who had led the movement questioning the legitimacy of his birth certificate. “You sit down with people who opposed you,” said Ms. Henderson, who is black. “You sit down and try to find a common ground with people who were attacking your family, spitting on your family. That’s President Obama’s legacy. ”

0 - On the morning of May 18, 2014, Violeta Lagunes was perplexed by a series of strange messages that appeared in her Gmail inbox. It was Election Day to choose the leadership of Mexico’s   Partido Acción Nacional, or PAN, and Lagunes, a former federal congresswoman, was holding a strategy meeting in her office in Puebla city. The emails seemed harmless, at least at first. One appeared to come from the account of a trusted colleague. It asked her to download and review a document. Lagunes clicked on the link, but it seemed to be broken, so she wrote back to her colleague and asked him to send it again. Elsewhere in her inbox was an email from Google warning her that someone had tried to log in to her account. Meanwhile, she began to receive phone calls from PAN allies, who claimed that they had received emails from Lagunes’s account that she did not remember sending. Now Lagunes was worried. Around 1 o’clock, she called the colleague who appeared to have emailed her. She reached him at a restaurant, where he was finishing lunch with other campaign allies. “I did not send you an email,” he insisted. A consultant with the campaign  —   who asked to remain anonymous in order to preserve his relationships with other candidates  —   overheard the conversation. He knew of other campaign workers who had been receiving similar messages: emails with vague subject lines, asking the recipient to review a document or click a link. The campaign, he realized, had been hacked. In the vote for party leader, Lagunes and her allies in Puebla  —   a   drive southeast from Mexico City  —   were supporting the challenger, a senator who promised to return the party to its conservative roots. But the incumbent was backed by Puebla’s powerful governor, Rafael Moreno Valle. One of Mexico’s rising political stars, Moreno Valle is close to Mexico’s president, Enrique Peña Nieto, and has forged an alliance between PAN and Nieto’s centrist Partido Revolucionario Institucional, or PRI, long the dominant force in Mexican politics. Since winning the governorship in 2010, Moreno Valle’s opponents say, his ambitions have grown, and he has resorted to increasingly harsh measures to keep Puebla state  —   including members of his own party  —   under control. “In the beginning, the governor was   and respectful,” Rafael Micalco, a former leader of PAN in Puebla state, told me. “When he became governor, he transformed. Now he controls the party through threats. ” This race to retain control of the party leadership in 2014 was a crucial test for the governor, who was rumored to be considering a run for Mexico’s presidency in 2018. (This past September, Moreno Valle publicly announced his intent to run.) Clashes between the two camps were especially intense in Puebla, where backers of the challenger, Ernesto Cordero, claimed that the governor was using public money to support the incumbent, Gustavo Madero, though the governor’s office has denied these charges. Shortly before the election, Madero’s campaign manager said that Cordero’s side was trying to undermine the legitimacy of the process. “Their strategy is clear from the outset,” he said in an interview with a Mexican magazine. “’u2009‘If I win, good. If not, I was cheated. ’’u2009” After Lagunes’s call on Election Day, her colleagues rushed from the restaurant back to their local headquarters, a hotel conference room that they had nicknamed “the bunker. ” All morning, they had been trying to reach their field network, a group of 40 Cordero canvassers who were working to get out the vote in Puebla state. But the field network seemed to have gone dark. Few of the canvassers were even answering their phones. Hackers, the team concluded, must have found the list of the canvassers’ names and phone numbers  —   widely circulated by email within the campaign  —   and begun to intimidate them. “The day before,” the consultant told me, the field network was “motivated and eager to do this work. After the hack, it was very hard to reach them. The few who did answer said that they had received phone calls saying that their lives were at stake. They were worried that if they went out, they or their families would get hurt. ” According to another worker on Cordero’s campaign, who also requested anonymity, citing fear of reprisal, the message to the canvassers was simple and direct: “We know who you are. If you don’t want any trouble, shut down your cellphone and stop your activity. ” The worker added: “It’s an authoritarian regime. ” Madero won the election, with 57 percent of the 162, 792 votes cast over all. In Puebla, his margin was substantially larger, roughly 74 percent. Cordero’s team decided not to contest the result. They had suspicions about how they were hacked. But it would be another year before any evidence emerged. Their political enemies, leaked documents seemed to show, had built a spying operation using software made by an Italian firm called Hacking Team  —   just one of many private companies that, largely below public notice, have sprung up to aid governments in surveilling the private lives of individual citizens. The industry claims that its products comply with local laws and are used to fight crime and terror. But in many countries around the world, these tools have proved to be equally adept at political espionage. On average, an American office worker sends and receives roughly 120 emails per day, a number that grows with each passing year. The ubiquity and utility of email has turned it into a   record of our    lives, rich with mundane and potentially embarrassing details, stored in a perpetual archive, accessible from anywhere on earth and protected, in some cases, by nothing more than a single password. In the case of Violeta Lagunes, her email login represented a point of vulnerability, a seam where the digital walls protecting her campaign were at the mercy of her human judgment  —   specifically, whether she could determine if a message from an apparently reputable source was real or fake. Nearly two years later, John Podesta, chairman of Hillary Clinton’s campaign, was faced with a similar judgment call. An email warned him that someone in Ukraine had tried to access his Gmail account and asked him to click on a button and reset his password. His senior adviser forwarded the email to one of the campaign’s technology experts. “This is a legitimate email,” he replied, in what the expert later would clarify was a simple typing error on his part he meant to say it was not legitimate. “The gmail one is REAL,” the senior adviser wrote to Podesta and another aide. And so, like Lagunes, Podesta fell into a trap. The button appeared to lead to an official Google page, but it was in fact a meticulously personalized fake, with a domain address linked to a remote cluster of atolls in the South Pacific. The details were designed to trick Podesta into entering his password. This technique is known as “spear phishing. ” It is an especially potent weapon against companies and political organizations because it needs to succeed only one time, against one target. After that, attackers can use the trusted identity of the first compromised account to more easily lure colleagues into opening infected attachments or clicking on malicious links. Not only will a working email password yield years of intraoffice chatter, invoices,   bills and confidential memos it can often be leveraged into control of other personal accounts  —   Twitter, Facebook, Amazon  —   and even access to company servers and internet domains. The Podesta and Lagunes episodes are far from the only cases in which hackers have used information from stolen emails as a weapon against an entire institution. The 2009 “Climategate” incident, which exposed troves of emails from prominent climate researchers, began when hackers remotely broke into servers at a British university with the help of illicitly obtained passwords. The 2014 hack of internal Sony files, which American officials attributed to the North Korean government, began with a series of   emails that attackers then used to dig deeper into Sony’s servers. Each hack yielded the most private thoughts and deeds from the members of each respective organization: their blunt insults, their quashed dissents, their   plans, their smarmy flattery, all chronicled in time down to the hundredth of the second when the author clicked “send. ” In an earlier era, the hackers might have had to engage in riskier behavior, like bribery or burglary. Now, in many cases, all they had to do was send along a link. The White House, C. I. A. and F. B. I. have all claimed that, based on classified evidence, they can trace the hacks of Podesta’s email account (and other hacks of people close to the Clinton campaign) back to the Russian government. But with the rise of private firms like Hacking Team, penetrating the email accounts of political opponents does not require the kind of money and expertise available to major powers. A   website called Insider Surveillance lists more than a dozen companies selling   ethical malware, including   Hacking Team and the German firms FinFisher and Trovicor. Compared with conventional arms, surveillance software is subject to few trade controls a recent attempt by the United States to regulate it under a   pact called the Wassenaar Arrangement failed. “The technology is morally neutral,” says Joel Brenner, a former inspector general of the National Security Agency. “The same program that you use to monitor your babysitter might be used by Bashar Assad or Abdel Fattah   to keep track of whomever they don’t like. ” Hacking Team has fewer than 50 employees, but it has customers all over the world. According to internal documents, its espionage tool, which is called the Remote Control System, or R. C. S. can be licensed for as little as $200, 000 a year  —   well within the budget of a provincial strongman. After it has been surreptitiously installed on a target’s computer or phone, the Remote Control System can invisibly eavesdrop on everything: text messages, emails, phone and Skype calls, location data and so on. Whereas the N. S. A. ’s   programs grab data in transit from switching rooms and undersea cables, the R. C. S. acquires it at the source, right off a target’s device, before it can be encrypted. It carries out an invisible, digitized equivalent of a    . The United States government is almost certainly the world’s most formidable repository of hacking talent, but its most powerful cyberweapons are generally reserved for intelligence agencies and the military. This might explain why, according to company documents, at least two federal   agencies have been Hacking Team clients: the F. B. I. beginning in 2011, and the Drug Enforcement Administration, beginning in 2012. The F. B. I. contract paid Hacking Team more than $700, 000 the D. E. A. appears to have used the software to go after targets in Colombia. Documents show that the company has also sold its software to some of the world’s most repressive governments. Some, like those of Honduras, Ethiopia, Bahrain, Morocco, Egypt and Saudi Arabia, are Western allies. Other countries, like Uzbekistan and Turkey, have a more troubled relationship. A few are openly hostile to the West. Between 2012 and 2014, Hacking Team was paid nearly one million euros by the government of Sudan, a United   state sponsor of terrorism. Even more notable, in light of recent events, is the   relationship that Hacking Team carried on with the F. S. B. one of Russia’s main intelligence agencies. As with Puebla, Hacking Team used a middleman, a research agency called Kvant, to handle its sales to Russia. Between 2012 and 2014, the agency paid Hacking Team 451, 000 euros to license the Remote Control System. Hacking Team claims that it draws the line at customers who commit “gross   abuses” and that it sells exclusively to governments operating within the laws of their own countries. In at least one case, David Vincenzetti, Hacking Team’s founder and chief executive, told a salesman to hold off on a potential Mexican client. “We sell to official, governmental LEAs”  —     agencies  —   “and security agencies ONLY,” Vincenzetti wrote in an email. But at other times, a more casual attitude prevailed inside the company. “If one sells sandwiches to Sudan, he is not subject, as far as my knowledge goes, to the law,” one Hacking Team lawyer wrote in an internal email. “Hacking Team should be treated like a sandwich vendor. ” When asked about its arrangements in various countries, the company responded that it “does not comment on confidential business dealings. ” Its American spokesman, Eric Rabe, did tell me that neither Russia nor Sudan is a current Hacking Team customer. (The relationships, Rabe wrote, ended in 2014, Russia because “the Putin government evolved from one considered friendly to the West to a more hostile regime” and Sudan “because of concerns about the country’s ability to use the system in accordance with the H. T. contract. ”) Separately, the company confirmed that the state of Puebla was, in fact, a former client. Until recently, most of what was known about the world of private surveillance companies was a matter of hearsay and speculation. Industry players kept a low profile, operating discreetly from rented offices and meeting potential customers in person a few times a year at carefully screened trade shows. This is why it was so notable when, in July 2015, an unusual tweet appeared in Hacking Team’s Twitter feed. “Since we have nothing to hide,” it read, “we’re publishing all our emails, files and source code. ” Then came another tweet, with links to a downloadable file called Hacked Team. The file was huge, 420 gigabytes of material scraped from Hacking Team’s internal servers. Inside were 33 folders containing the company’s contracts, payroll documents, invoices, legal memos,   records and a   cache of email correspondence from the chief executive on down. Hacking Team had itself been hacked. WikiLeaks pounced on the breach and quickly uploaded the emails into a searchable database. Anyone with an internet connection could now read the chief executive joking about how his company was in the business of selling “the evilest technology on earth. ” You could browse Hacking Team’s source code, including one line using “bomb_blueprints. pdf” as a placeholder for files that might be found on a target’s device. On Reddit, an online peanut gallery formed around the   online habits of one Hacking Team engineer and his own notably weak passwords  —   HTPassword! P4ssword, Passw0rd. But the most damaging exposures in the leak by far were Hacking Team’s client list and the names of some of the clients’ targets. In South Korea, newspapers focused on evidence suggesting that Hacking Team’s software had helped the nation’s intelligence service rig an election after the leak, one agent who had reportedly used the system there committed suicide. In Ecuador, a magazine found an email with seven phone numbers that the government appeared to have targeted with the R. C. S. Three belonged to lawmakers a fourth to the mayor of Quito all four were members of the opposition party. With the source code for the Remote Control System now public, the company and its clients had to stop using it temporarily. By the end of the year, though, Hacking Team had updated its product and was trying to rebuild its reputation. I was curious whether a company that profited from online breaches could recover from its own. Eric Rabe, the American spokesman, sounded eager to meet me for coffee in Philadelphia. A grandfather and former   anchor, he exudes   credibility. “If you disagree with someone on the internet,” he said, of the Hacked Team files, with a wave of his hand, “there’s no need to have a   debate. Just go destroy them. ” A couple of months later, I went to Milan to visit Hacking Team’s headquarters, a stately gray apartment building with boxes of limp flowers adorning a few of its sooty sills. Waiting to demonstrate the company’s software were Rabe Philippe Vinci, a company vice president and Alessandro Scarafile, a young engineer. Scarafile had gathered a Dell desktop computer and three smartphones: iPhone, BlackBerry and Android. The screen from his own laptop, which represented the console of a client intelligence agency, was projected on the wall. Several icons represented the various streams of data that could potentially be acquired by gaining control of the target’s computer: images from   cameras, sound from   mikes, screenshots, detailed records of applications opened and bitcoins transferred, a continuous log of location with latitude and longitude, and logs of address books, calendars, phone calls, Skype calls and passwords, as well as websites visited. A key logger recorded every key that was pressed. It was a lot to keep track of. Two other views, called “line of events” and “line of actions,” assembled the information into chronological order. Scarafile, who was playing both the customer and the target, or “bad guy,” turned on the Dell. Judging by the background on the desktop, a gothic scene framed by castlelike silhouettes, our target seemed to be planning a terrorist attack from Transylvania. There are three methods, Scarafile explained, for getting the Remote Control System onto a target’s device. Customers can gain physical access to the device and then infect it with a USB stick or memory card. They can beam the R. C. S. in over a   network. Or they can send the customer an email and get him to click on an infected attachment  —   usually a file from a   program like Microsoft Word or PowerPoint. Scarafile did not mention a fourth method, one described by Hacking Team’s critics and referred to in its internal emails: the installation of the R. C. S. through a more elaborate process called “network injection,” which is said to involve pinpointing the target’s exact location on the internet, observing the person as he orders up, say, a YouTube cat video, and then serving up a doctored version of the same page, one with the desired cat video playing in the foreground  —   YouTube logo and all  —   as the R. C. S. discreetly rolls in past the digital gates. Whatever the method of infection, the malicious code, known as an “agent,” then communicates with its masters anonymously, its dispatches routed through a series of dedicated servers scattered around the world. Even if the target gets suspicious and figures out that something is wrong, this chain of servers makes it nearly impossible for him to figure out exactly who is using Hacking Team’s product to spy on him. For the demo, Scarafile opted for the third method, which he referred to as “a bit of social engineering. ” Using the customer’s computer, he sent the target an email with a Word file attached. Then he returned to the target’s computer and   on it, just as Lagunes had clicked on the link in her inbox. “From now on,” he said, “this system is currently infected, or monitored, by the Remote Control System. ” It would remain so even if the suspect turned off his machine or logged out. On the timeline, the target appeared as a stubbly lout in an undershirt, named “Jimmy Page . .. head of the terrorist cell. ” Using Jimmy Page’s Dell, Scarafile logged into Page’s Gmail, Facebook and Twitter. He opened up Skype, perused Page’s criminal colleagues (Don Corleone, Harry Potter, Keyser Soze) and left one of them a voice mail message from Page’s phone. Accessing a USB drive attached to the infected computer, Scarafile opened an encrypted file that turned out to contain an order to “kill David Vincenzetti. ” R. C. S. captured it all, including periodic snapshots of Scarafile, as Page, at work. “I don’t like the words ‘inject’ and ‘infect,’’u2009” Vinci, the vice president, said. “R. C. S. is deploying the agent into the device of the target because you want to monitor some of his activities. Exactly the way that law enforcement is listening to some of your phone calls, right?” Rabe had told me that Vincenzetti was “a fighter,” and his combative side was apparent from a collage of magazine clippings and printouts taped to the wall beside his desk  —   a sort of mood board, like those used in the advertising industry to gather inspiration before the unveiling of a new brand. Vincenzetti’s mood board, though, wasn’t about sneakers or cola. It was about the global struggle for power, which he seemed to envision as one big conflict, a battle between the good guys and the bad guys. On the good side was a photo of the bell that aspiring Navy SEALs can ring should they want to quit the program during Hell Week, and a quote from another entrepreneur that “business is war. ” On the bad side, Vincenzetti had taped up a satellite image showing one of the hottest zones of international tension, the artificial islands rising in the South China Sea, a line of terrestrial pawns advancing China’s sphere of influence. Beside it was a chart about Iran, depicting how the country could continue to advance its nuclear program despite the recent   deal. “I think the Iran deal is just terrible,” Vincenzetti said, and then added, sarcastically, “Oh, it’s such a very peaceful expansion. Very peaceful. ” “That is not an official company position,” Rabe interjected. Vincenzetti, now 48, is a familiar type  —   a ferociously competitive, driven entrepreneur whose existence is organized around his work. He has a wife, who was born in Morocco, and no children. His small,   eyes can make him seem sleepily blasé. On the morning we met at Hacking Team’s offices, he wore jeans, a   cardigan and a striped shirt, unbuttoned to midchest. He seemed more comfortable on his feet than sitting down. As we talked in a conference room, he periodically leapt to his feet and stalked around the table, considering in turn the espresso machine, the view from the window, a case of bottled water. “If I wanted to break into this room, how would I do it?” he asked. “There is a door, and there are two windows. ” He pressed his hands against the glass panes. “The perimeter is the first thing you must secure,” he continued. Securing data was what he did earlier in his career. Now he had moved on. “If you cannot break into a bank, you cannot protect a bank. So when you are in security, really there is no difference between thinking offensively and defensively. ” In the   Vincenzetti’s parents, a salesman and a schoolteacher, bought him a Commodore 64, one of the earliest personal computers. He soon created a   clone, a Tron   game and a   adventure game. As a   student at the University of Milan in the ’90s, he became fascinated by cryptography he corresponded with programmers around the world about new cryptographic theories and wrote code for email encryption. In his senior year, he was appointed to administer the university’s internal network, a post that was usually reserved for a graduate student. Vincenzetti remembers these early days as a time when “everything was free and no one was trying to harm you. We were wide open and accessible. All the best were called hackers, and I was a hacker. ” Vincenzetti left university early and founded three companies, all of them focused on defensive cybersecurity. After he founded Hacking Team in 2003, he tried to sell his services to Italian police agencies but found them skeptical that Mafiosi and other   criminals would ever bother to encrypt their communications. In Italy, the police were also used to getting whatever they needed through wiretaps, arranged with varying degrees of formality through their contacts at telecommunications firms. But after the 2004 Madrid train bombings, which were coordinated via cellphones and the internet, police officers and intelligence agents not just in Italy but all across Europe became interested in contracting with   vendors, part of an emerging arms race over   encryption. The growth of Skype made it easy for users to encrypt their communications, and the authorities were eager to pay for countermeasures like the Remote Control System. Singapore, Hacking Team’s first   client, signed on in 2008. The company’s Middle Eastern business took off in 2011, a boom that coincided with the beginning of the Arab Spring. By then, Hacking Team had entered a growth phase, its business driven in part by demand among   governments for   surveillance tools. According to two former employees, the company held talks with Col. Muammar  ’s chief security officer, who wanted to build a countrywide   scheme that could be embedded in every Libyan cellphone. (Rabe would not confirm or deny that this meeting occurred, and added: “The company often receives requests to provide services that it does not have available or would sell. ”) The United Nations, which prohibits the export of “electronic weaponry” to Sudan, has investigated Hacking Team’s activities there. Nineteen members of the Italian Parliament signed a petition raising the question of whether the Egyptian government might have used the R. C. S. to track Giulio Regeni, a    Italian student who appears to have been under government surveillance and whose mutilated body turned up on the side of a road in Egypt last year. Hacking Team’s software has not been connected to the case, but the company has done business with the current Egyptian regime. As part of the controversy, the Italian government temporarily revoked Hacking Team’s global export license, so that for several months the company had to file a separate application for each of its customers outside the European Union. (When I brought up the Regeni case with Rabe, he called the dead student “this Italian national who got himself killed in Egypt. ” He cited Hacking Team’s official policy  —   the company neither knows nor desires to know the identities of the people its customers choose to target. “There is no evidence that Hacking Team’s software had anything to do with Regeni’s demise,” Rabe said.) All Hacking Team customers sign contracts agreeing to comply with local laws. The company says that it vets potential customers and studies reports from journalists and   groups, looking for “objective evidence or credible concerns” that its products are being abused. But when it comes to Hacking Team’s own interactions with customers, leaked documents suggest that employees have sometimes turned a blind eye. In the case of the Puebla government and other Latin American customers, Hacking Team employees appeared to ignore warnings suggesting that the Remote Control System was being used to gather intelligence on the political opposition. On multiple occasions, customers emailed Hacking Team attachments with   content, including polling data, party registration forms and invitations addressed to and signed by elected officials. Rather than ask what these files had to do with fighting crime and drug trafficking, Hacking Team   members simply emailed them back, as requested, with an embedded “exploit,” turning the document into a surveillance tool to be used against whomever it was sent on to. Asked about these cases, Rabe replied that customers “are not supposed to be using it for political purposes, but I don’t think it’s reasonable to expect that an Italian computer programmer,” i. e. a support technician, “would have seen these files and known what was going on. . .. I think that’s a stretch, that an Italian software guy could know that an individual is a dissident. ” Hacking Team’s most persistent critic is Citizen Lab, a research group at the University of Toronto’s Munk School of Global Affairs. Before the Hacked Team leak, Citizen Lab documented cases in which Hacking Team software turned up on the devices of activists in Morocco and the United Arab Emirates, as well as an   journalist in Alexandria, Va. Ronald Deibert, Citizen Lab’s director, told me that Hacking Team “is a company that appears to have no internal controls on abuse of its products. ” When I asked Vincenzetti about this, he said that Citizen Lab was motivated by money, noting that the group won a   grant a week after publishing a report on Hacking Team’s sales to Ethiopia. “Their identity,” he said, “is: ‘I am the defender of free speech, I am the defender of liberty and democracy.’ O. K. So am I. So is every rational guy. ” If Citizen Lab really cared about good and evil, he said, it would be fighting China and Iran. Almost immediately after the Hacked Team documents went online, they were being pored over by R3D, a Mexico     group. Luis Fernando García, R3D’s director, says that intimidation and online surveillance have increased under Peña Nieto’s presidency, and he took notice when Citizen Lab, in 2014, released a report that traced a chain of servers associated with Hacking Team that routed data through Hong Kong, London, Amsterdam and Atlanta before terminating somewhere inside Mexico. Exactly who was on the receiving end of the traffic and what they were doing with it was unknown at the time, but now R3D’s team recognized that this could be their chance to find out. Shortly thereafter, R3D published three invoices from the Hacked Team cache showing that one state government  —   that of Jalisco, on the Pacific Coast  —   had paid the company nearly half a million euros for the Remote Control System. Soon other documents were found in the leak to implicate several more states, including Puebla, though most of the states denied ever using the software. (Jalisco later admitted to purchasing the system, which it claimed was for its prosecutor’s office.) The story failed to get much traction in the Mexican press, except in Puebla, after R3D connected with Lado B, a small   collective there. The site’s name translates to “B Side,” as in the back of a hit single  —   symbolizing its dedication to telling stories that would otherwise go untold. Lado B’s editor, Ernesto Aroche, was not surprised that Puebla’s government had been using the Remote Control System. In Moreno Valle’s six years as governor there, he has spent lavishly on new surveillance systems, including multiple “security arches,”   structures that scrutinize traffic with video cameras and   and whose cost had raised some questions in the local press. Beginning in 2013, Aroche began noticing solicitations on the   website for hidden cameras and other spying equipment. When he filed a   request about them, the government’s form response indicated that these orders had never been filled, but Aroche was skeptical, given the mounting evidence that Moreno Valle’s administration had begun using its security apparatus for political purposes. There were periodic   of homes belonging to dissident politicians and journalists, with the burglars sometimes taking little besides their victims’ laptops. Politicians would answer calls from unknown numbers, only to hear their own taped conversations played back to them. Another journalist, Fernando Maldonado, received an unmarked envelope full of what were purportedly transcripts of 400 private phone calls made by Puebla politicians. As Aroche and R3D sifted through the Hacked Team file dump, they discovered that the files on Puebla had more detail than those dealing with Hacking Team’s other Mexican accounts. The Puebla client often wrote emails asking for help with infecting a particular document with a malicious virus. Some of these came from an account  —   soporteuiamx@gmail. com  —   that also appears in many of Hacking Team’s internal support tickets. One of those tickets documents a client’s request for help in infecting an attachment: an invitation to attend an event for a Mexican political organization, signed by Violeta Lagunes and addressed to another party colleague opposed to the governor. Aroche interviewed politicians and journalists who were on the receiving end of the infected emails contained in the Hacked Team trove. According to a 2015 article that Lado B published in conjunction with a politics website, the Puebla group sent Hacking Team at least 47 requests to infect specific files that it would then forward on to their targets. Almost all of those files had to do with political issues. Going through the Hacked Team materials, Aroche found the name of a Puebla government employee who seemed to be working within the spying operation. “Before, we had been talking about ghosts,” Aroche told me. “Now, we could prove it. We started putting names on the actors. ” More than a year later, there have been no political repercussions for the governor or his allies in Puebla. I met Aroche this fall at the Lado B offices, a small room facing a courtyard in a crumbling stone building from Puebla’s colonial days. The only suggestion of Lado B’s presence was a small sticker on the window. Inside, Aroche was thumbing through an envelope of documents that he had wrung out of the state government. Two redacted contracts signed by Puebla officials showed an arrangement between the state government and a company called Sym Servicios Integrales, which Aroche’s reporting had identified as an intermediary for Hacking Team. The details of what had been purchased were redacted. “These contracts demonstrate that the Puebla government had a commercial relationship with this company,” Aroche said. “I’m sorry if they’re a little bit stained  —   I dropped some coffee on them. ” (Sym Servicios Integrales says it “never sold H. T. technology to the state of Puebla. ”) In a brief written statement from Sagrario Conde Valerio, a spokeswoman, the government of Puebla denied allegations of spying and claimed that “no relationship exists nor has ever existed between the government of Puebla and the company ‘Hacking Team. ’’u2009” The government declined to respond further to a list of questions. But a former official from Moreno Valle’s administration claimed to me that more than $1 million was being diverted from the state budget each year to fund the   unit. Documents from the Hacked Team archive indicate that Hacking Team received an order from the government of Puebla for 415, 000 euros in the spring of 2013, and that Hacking Team booked hotel rooms for three of its associates who traveled to Puebla in May of that year. Some of the R. C. S. training, I was told, took place in a green building on a residential street. When I visited the purported site this fall, lettering above the door said that the building was once a school. Now it had bars across the door and mirrored windows. Neighbors told me it had been abandoned for several months. “People would come and go,” one woman said. “They were very secretive. They would drop off equipment, take away equipment. Then one day, about a year ago, they came and took everything away and left. ” Another neighbor said that he often saw a   car parked in front of the house and a man with a limp entering and leaving  —   a former Mexican intelligence agent, according to someone who was present during the Hacking Team training. Mexico is Hacking Team’s biggest export market, accounting for nearly six million euros in sales, according to leaked documents. Ostensibly, the Remote Control System is intended for fighting criminals and drug traffickers there. (“There have been reports that the software was used in the apprehension of Chapo Guzman,” Rabe told me, referring to the Mexican drug lord. “I can’t confirm it. ”) The files indicate that at least seven other Mexican state governments were Hacking Team clients, but because they did not use email to the same extent as Puebla, their activities are harder to track. Multiple former Hacking Team employees told me that abuses of the software were not limited to Puebla. One former employee described having the system set up inside a mayor’s office. Katitza Rodríguez,   director at the Electronic Frontier Foundation, says that Mexican law allows for interception of communication, like the wiretapping of phone lines, but it does not grant precise legal authority to use new, powerful invasive tools like those created by Hacking Team. And she argues that it is much more dangerous in Mexico than in other Western countries, where checks and balances are stronger. “This is much more intrusive than the interception of a phone call,” she said. “They are not only listening they are taking over your laptop. Mexico needs to have a full debate in Congress about what legal safeguards are needed for this kind of surveillance or if the government should be using it at all. ” The Hacked Team files indicate that in   Hacking Team opened an American subsidiary and leased office space in Reston, Va. a   drive from the C. I. A. ’s headquarters. The company drew up a “U. S. action plan,” calling for a significant North American expansion, with new hires and rounds of pitches to the Department of Justice, the United States military and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Hacking Team was also targeting another potentially lucrative market: American state and local governments. It pitched the R. C. S. to   agencies in San Bernardino, Calif. Washington New York Fort Lauderdale and Orlando. In a risk assessment commissioned by the company, lawyers advised that such sales were probably legal, so long as the product was provided “at a distance” from actual investigations and used “in the normal course of government operations. ” American expansion by companies like Hacking Team may not face much resistance from the federal government, which is becoming more accepting of electronic surveillance as part of normal police work. Last year, the Justice Department successfully changed the rules of criminal procedure, making it easier for federal agents to hack into multiple computers with a single warrant. Senator Steve Daines of Montana, who tried to block the change, complained that it gives “unlimited power for unlimited hacking. ” In a 2014 address, now referred to in cybersecurity circles as his “Going Dark” speech, the F. B. I. ’s director, James Comey, argued that the encryption built into Apple products posed a threat to public safety  —   enabling not only terrorism but also drug trafficking, child abuse and   . Instead of “a safe that can’t be cracked,” Comey wanted technology companies to lend him the combination. “The law hasn’t kept pace with technology, and this disconnect has created a significant   problem,” Comey said. “We call it ‘going dark. ’’u2009” As the United States government has argued for weaker protections around personal communications, American businesses have been spreading more powerful surveillance tools around the world. Many foreign   agencies already buy   products from SS8  —   a company backed by the storied   firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield Byers  —   as well as from the Harris Corporation, a $13 billion company based in Florida and traded on the New York Stock Exchange. At least 25 American police departments have used Harris’s Stingray device, which mimics cellphone towers and can intercept cellphone calls within 200 meters. All known sales of Stingrays to local law enforcement have been authorized by the F. B. I. which has since fought in court to keep those sales secret. In Baltimore alone, Stingrays have been used more than 4, 000 times, in routine drug investigations. Much less is known about another Harris product, the advanced Hailstorm, which is also sold to local police departments. Hailstorm is reportedly capable of implanting malware that can take control of a targeted phone, much like Hacking Team’s R. C. S. The Hacked Team documents that offer the most revealing view of the company’s ethos happen to be the most public ones. For years, as often as two or three times a day, Vincenzetti sent mass emails to hundreds of his business contacts. The recipients included numerous members of the United States military and intelligence community, as well as government employees from the city of Cincinnati and the Internal Revenue Service. In these messages, Vincenzetti often addresses this audience collectively as “gents. ” The news he cites is a reminder of how the geopolitical winds have been blowing in favor of Hacking Team and other   allies of law and order. In Vincenzetti’s world, the system is always, as George Tenet famously said about  . 11 intelligence, “blinking red”: the imploding Middle East a restive,   Russia battalions of   jihadis roaming around Europe with their encrypted thumb drives and   expertise. Against this backdrop of   danger, concerns about human rights are naïve at best. Vincenzetti’s emails vividly exploit this sense of danger and alarm. He writes about shadowy gangs of Iranian hackers using the #JeSuisCharlie hashtag to inject malware into French laptops. He celebrates the conviction of Ross Ulbricht, a. k. a. the Dread Pirate Roberts, creator of the Silk Road website. After the arrests of two Uzbek men in Brooklyn for telling informants that they wanted to join up with ISIS, Vincenzetti writes of “a very serious terrorist plot on American soil foiled. ” He went on to tap out this sales pitch: The following day, he gave a few more hints: The tone of Vincenzetti’s sales patter was strangely upbeat, especially considering his dire forecasts. It was almost as if he were in the business of selling microwave ovens or sandwiches, not tools through which the private lives of criminals (and whoever else) could be fully laid bare. Vincenzetti’s unstated equation  —   privacy is secrecy, and secrecy is terrorism  —   is less controversial than it might appear. A supportive echo can be heard in many public statements from American officials, which Vincenzetti often cut and pasted into his mass emails. The former attorney general Eric Holder called for “investigative and prosecutorial tools that allow us to be  . ” When Comey warned that “encryption threatens to lead all of us to a very dark place,” Vincenzetti forwarded it along approvingly, with the tagline: “We DO have an answer to many if not all of his concerns. ” And when, in May 2015, Comey warned of a “threat” that had “morphed” into “a chaotic spider web,” Vincenzetti sent word to his “gents” as well. One month later, an anonymous hack revealed Hacking Team’s own invisible spider web, and one year later, during the   to Election Day, came the internal emails of the Democratic Party. By then it was clear that tools for digital burglary had spread well beyond the hands of regular police officers. Comey had argued for weaker safes Vincenzetti was selling longer crowbars. They could be used to chase Jimmy Page, arrest Chapo Guzman, fight crime, smear a political opponent or just keep tabs on someone, anyone. To be hidden is to be a terrorist  —   this was the heart of his pitch. Any digital redoubt that could resist being pried open was a public risk and a private opportunity.

0 - WASHINGTON  —   A legal fight to clean up tons of chicken manure fouling the waters of Oklahoma’s bucolic northeastern corner  —   much of it from neighboring Arkansas  —   was in full swing six years ago when the conservative lawyer Scott Pruitt took office as Oklahoma’s attorney general. His response: Put on the brakes. Rather than push for a federal judge to punish the companies by extracting perhaps tens of millions of dollars in damages, Oklahoma’s new chief law enforcement officer quietly negotiated a deal to simply study the problem further. The move came after he had taken tens of thousands of dollars in campaign contributions from executives and lawyers for the poultry industry. It was one of a series of instances in which Mr. Pruitt put cooperation with industry before confrontation as he sought to blunt the impact of federal environmental policies in his state  —   against oil, gas, agriculture and other interests. His antipathy to federal regulation  —   he sued the Environmental Protection Agency 14 times  —   in many ways defined his tenure as Oklahoma’s attorney general. Now, Mr. Pruitt, tapped to head Donald J. Trump’s Environmental Protection Agency, will have the opportunity to engineer a radical shift in Washington. If confirmed by the Senate, he is expected to shelve the Obama administration’s aggressive environmental enforcement and embrace a more collaborative approach with the industries that the agency is charged with policing, many of which have helped him advance his political career. The impact would stretch from the nation’s waterways to the planet’s climate, since the E. P. A. carries out and enforces rules to combat global warming. “He has advocated and stood up for the profits of business, be it the poultry companies or the energy industry and other polluters, at the expense of people who have to drink the water or breathe the air,” said Mark Derichsweiler, who led the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality division responsible for overseeing the   cleanup. Mr. Derichsweiler retired in 2015 after 40 years with the state, frustrated with Mr. Pruitt’s approach. Mr. Pruitt declined a request to comment. But his supporters contend that his record demonstrates a deeply held philosophy that states understand their needs best and should be allowed to regulate their own environment. On Thursday, a coalition of 23 powerful conservative advocacy groups endorsed Mr. Pruitt’s nomination, in advance of his confirmation hearing, set for Wednesday. “Some claim Mr. Pruitt opposes clean air and water. This could not be further from the truth,” wrote the groups, which include the political action committee Club for Growth the American Energy Alliance, which has advised Mr. Trump on energy policy and Americans for Tax Reform, the group founded by the   lobbyist Grover Norquist. Mr. Pruitt, the endorsement said, “understands that many of the nation’s challenges regarding clean air and water are best met at the state and local level. ” Mr. Pruitt, if confirmed, will take over the agency in an odd position: He has spent the last seven years suing it to block regulations that he would be expected to put into effect and enforce. Some legal scholars say he should recuse himself from major pending environmental matters, while groups like the Environmental Defense Fund are urging Congress to reject his confirmation. “The president’s choices deserve a lot of deference from Congress and even environmental groups,” said Fred Krupp, president of the Environmental Defense Fund. “But at some point when the nominee has spent his entire career attempting to dismantle environmental protections, it becomes unacceptable. That’s why Mr. Pruitt is the first E. P. A. nominee from either party that the Environmental Defense Fund has opposed in our   history. ” Some experts say that while returning more authority to states can be desirable in some cases, environmental protection is probably not one of them. Smog and toxic chemicals that foul the air and waterways of one state may originate from one or several others, necessitating federal oversight of pollution. “Pollution doesn’t respect state boundaries,” said Patrick A. Parenteau, a professor of environmental law at Vermont Law School. “States have limited ability to regulate pollution from outside the state, and almost every state is downstream or downwind from other pollution. ” Case in point: the “Green Country” chicken battle that Mr. Pruitt inherited in eastern Oklahoma. The phosphorus and nitrates in chicken manure were causing algae blooms in the ponds, streams and lakes of the 1.  acre Illinois River watershed, which reaches from Arkansas into Oklahoma. In 2005, Attorney General Drew Edmondson of Oklahoma, Mr. Pruitt’s predecessor, sued Tyson Food, Cargill Turkey and a dozen other major poultry producers for damages caused by the pollution and to force them to change the way they disposed of 300, 000 tons a year of animal waste. As Mr. Pruitt ran for election, at least $40, 000 in contributions poured into his campaign from nearly 30 executives at poultry companies named in the lawsuit or attorneys at law firms representing them, including Mark Simmons, the founder of Simmons Foods Donald J. Smith, then the chief executive of Tysons Foods and Gary Weeks, a lawyer listed on the court papers as representing George’s, another company targeted in the lawsuit, according to data assembled by the nonprofit Environmental Working Group and confirmed by The New York Times. That money represents about 4 percent of the total $1 million he raised in the 2010 campaign, records show. After Mr. Pruitt took over, instead of pushing the federal judge for a ruling that, seven years later, still hasn’t been issued, he negotiated an agreement with Arkansas and the poultry companies to conduct a study of the appropriate level of phosphorus in the Illinois River. “Regulation through litigation is wrong in my view,” Mr. Pruitt told The Oklahoman newspaper in 2015. “That was not a decision my office made. It was a case we inherited. ” J. D. Strong, director of Oklahoma’s Wildlife Department and the state’s former Secretary of Environment, praised Mr. Pruitt for negotiating the settlement. “You can’t force a judge to rule,” Mr. Strong said. “Pruitt didn’t sit back and wait or badger the judge for a ruling. He worked to get the states of Oklahoma and Arkansas around the table. ” A spokesman from Tyson Food noted that the contributions to Mr. Pruitt’s campaign were made by the company’s executives and employees  —   including two former chief executives and members of the Tyson family  —   rather than by the company itself. “We’ll point out that our employees are encouraged to participate in the election process of public officials at all levels, and are at liberty to make personal contributions to any campaign as they see fit,” Worth Sparkman, the spokesman for Tyson, said. But Mr. Pruitt quietly allowed the expiration of a 2003 agreement that Mr. Edmondson helped negotiate with Arkansas to reduce poultry waste pollution  —   and to monitor the progress  —   without seeking another formal extension of the deal. And Mr. Pruitt shut down the specialized unit of four attorneys and a criminal investigator that had helped initiate the lawsuit against the 14 poultry companies. That environmental unit had broad jurisdiction, forcing   farmers to spend millions of dollars on their own cleanups and collecting tens of millions of dollars to clean up toxic sites in the state, including poisonous waste left at an abandoned lead and zinc mine known as Tar Creek. Mr. Pruitt, in response to questions, provided a list of environmental enforcement actions taken during his tenure, but the list includes cases that were largely initiated under Mr. Pruitt’s predecessor, Mr. Edmondson. A spokesman for Mr. Pruitt said that while the environmental unit had been closed, environmental cases continued to be handled by the state solicitor general’s unit. “Under the leadership of Attorney General Pruitt, this team has held bad actors accountable and protected stewardship of Oklahoma’s natural resources. ” But Mr. Edmondson said that prosecution of such environmental crimes fell as a result of the shuttering of the unit. “Under his tenure as attorney general, I don’t think environmental crimes have disappeared,” Mr. Edmondson said of Mr. Pruitt, in an interview. “It is just the filing of cases alleging environmental crimes that has largely disappeared. ” Residents who live in eastern Oklahoma, where local ponds and streams are still often clogged with algae, said they, too, were frustrated. Phosphorus levels have declined considerably  —   a total of about 70 percent between 1998 and 2015  —   but the largest reductions took place before Mr. Pruitt became attorney general, as wastewater treatment plants have been upgraded and more poultry farmers have shipped chicken waste for proper disposal. Still, the levels remain far above the state standard and the decline in pollution has been slower than some hoped. “I want an attorney general  —   and a head of our E. P. A.  —   who is not averse to protecting Oklahoma’s most outstanding waterways,” said Ed Brocksmith, who is a   of a group called Save the Illinois River. At the same time that he was retreating from his predecessor’s more aggressive approach, Mr. Pruitt sent a series of letters to federal regulators that in some cases were drafted by industry lobbyists and then put on his state government stationery, open records obtained by The New York Times in 2014 showed. The letters pressed the federal government to back down on proposals to tighten controls over energy production, such as oil and gas wells that can release   methane. Mr. Pruitt separately filed a series of lawsuits against the federal government, challenging regulations intended to reduce the discharge of poisonous mercury from   power plants, carbon dioxide blamed for climate change and other emissions that federal authorities argued were causing unsightly haze in Oklahoma’s air. In total, Mr. Pruitt filed 14 lawsuits challenging federal environmental regulations. In 13 of those cases, the   included companies that had contributed money to Mr. Pruitt or to   political campaign committees. Mr. Pruitt separately has served as a leader of the Republican Attorneys General Association, which since 2013 has collected $4. 2 million from   related companies, including Exxon Mobil, Koch Industries, Murray Energy and Southern Company, which in many cases have also supported the lawsuits he has filed. Given the scale of his regulatory challenges, Mr. Pruitt turned to major corporate law firms, which typically defend energy companies fighting these laws, for help. In some cases, that assistance was offered free. BakerHostetler, the   law firm whose clients have included dozens of energy industry players, assigned five of its lawyers to help Oklahoma overturn President Obama’s Clean Power Plan, intended to combat climate change. The law firm did not charge Oklahoma anything for the work, Mr. Pruitt’s office confirmed. David B. Rivkin Jr. the lead attorney from BakerHostetler who handled the matter, said that the work was considered charitable, similar to when major law firms give free legal advice to inmates at the Guantánamo Bay military prison. Environmentalists scoffed. “The industries and companies, through their corporate lawyers, are renting the state’s seal in order to make it look like their   arguments are being made by Scott Pruitt on behalf of a state,” said David Doniger, director of the Climate and Clean Air Program at the Natural Resources Defense Counsel. “It is a disgrace. ” Even federal judges are skeptical. Mr. Pruitt joined with Missouri and several other mostly rural states in one federal suit to beat back California’s regulations requiring egg farms, including those in Oklahoma, that wanted to sell in the state to seek more humane treatment of hens. In rejecting the suit, the federal judge admonished the plaintiffs. “The court concludes plaintiffs have not brought this action on behalf of their interest in the physical or economic   of their residents in general,” Judge Kimberly J. Mueller of the United States District Court wrote in her 2014 opinion, “but rather on behalf of a discrete group of egg farmers whose businesses will allegedly be impacted. ”

0 - ■ The federal taxpayer will be defending President Trump in a lawsuit filed against his business ownership. ■ Mr. Trump’s new hotel in Washington lost money in its opening months. ■ Two major donors to the Trump election effort will get plum ambassadorships. The Justice Department will defend President Trump from a new lawsuit that accuses him of violating the Constitution by allowing his hotels and business operations to accept payments from foreign governments, officials said on Monday. But while Mr. Trump said on Monday that the case was “without merit,” a Justice Department spokeswoman, Nicole Navas, declined to comment on it, saying only, “The department is reviewing the complaint and will respond as appropriate. ” The lawsuit, assigned on Monday to Judge Ronnie Abrams, an appointee of President Barack Obama, centers on the Constitution’s “emoluments” clause, which bars federal officeholders from accepting gifts or payments from foreign governments. Before his inauguration, lawyers hired by Mr. Trump argued that the clause “does not forbid    transactions with foreign officials,” like paying for hotel rooms. They also said Mr. Trump would donate profits from foreign governments’ patronage to the United States Treasury. But the lawsuit, filed by Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, a liberal government corruption watchdog, contends that the clause bars such transactions, too, and that donating profits does not solve the problem. It wants the judge to stop Mr. Trump’s businesses from accepting such payments. It is not clear that Judge Abrams will resolve the dispute over the clause’s meaning. First, she must decide whether the group has suffered enough injury to bring a court challenge. The group argued that it had standing to sue because keeping track of foreign payments to Mr. Trump’s businesses imposed a “significant diversion and depletion of its time, resources and effort. ” It cited a 1982 housing discrimination case as precedent for the idea that an advocacy organization can sue over conduct that drains its resources. But several scholars on Monday noted that Congress had enacted a statute that made it easier to challenge housing discrimination, but not emoluments clause violations. Josh Blackman, a conservative law professor at South Texas College of Law Houston, argued in a lengthy blog entry that a “ ” injury  —   like choosing to track certain conduct  —   is generally not sufficient to establish court standing. The Trump International Hotel in Washington took in far less revenue in its first two months than it had projected in estimates it had provided to the General Services Administration, which owns the building, meaning that the hotel lost more than $1. 1 million in September and October, according to a letter that House Democrats released on Monday. The revenue totals, and estimates of expected revenue, were released as the four House Democrats pressed the General Services Administration to explain how it would respond to the apparent breach that has taken place in the lease Mr. Trump has with the agency, given that it contains a clause that appears to prohibit federal elected officials from benefiting from the lease. The Trump Hotel, which opened in September, had estimated that it would generate $6. 4 million in revenue in its first two months, but it collected just $4. 1 million, according to the letter, citing information that Mr. Trump’s company provided to the agency as part of the lease agreement. The hotel had expected about $397, 000 in income through the end of October  —   revenue minus expenses  —   but actually had $1. 16 million in losses. These losses came as the hotel was just opening, a challenging time for any new hotel. And revenues have clearly surged after Mr. Trump was elected and in the time around the inauguration. The House Democrats, led by Representative Elijah E. Cummings, Democrat of Maryland, the ranking member of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee, asked the General Services Administration to explain what action, if any, it plans to take regarding the hotel lease, given the provision that appears to bar a federal elected official from holding it. The agency has so far made no public statement on how it will respond to this apparent breach. The Democrats also released a chart showing the corporate ownership arrangement behind the Trump Post Office LLC, the corporate entity set up by the Trump family to run the hotel. It shows that Mr. Trump, at least at the time he submitted the filing to the General Services Administration, controlled 76 percent of the company, while three of his children each had about 7. 5 percent. A representative from the Trump Organization did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Mr. Trump is expected to nominate two private equity executives and major campaign   to the plum diplomatic posts of Italy and Japan. Lewis M. Eisenberg has been chosen to be ambassador to Italy, and William F. Hagerty IV will be nominated to become ambassador to Japan, according to senior White House advisers. Mr. Eisenberg began his career at Goldman Sachs and then   Granite Capital International Group. He was the chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey at the time of the Sept. 11 attacks and has long served in top positions in Republican   circles. He led a joint   effort by the Trump campaign and the Republican National Committee and served on Mr. Trump’s Presidential Inaugural Committee. Mr. Hagerty served as an economic adviser during the administration of President George Bush and then built a career in private equity. He was Mitt Romney’s national finance chairman in 2008 and supported former Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida in the presidential campaign until Mr. Trump clinched the Republican nomination. He later became director of appointments for the Trump transition team. Early in his career, Mr. Hagerty lived in Japan for three years. Ambassadorships to Italy and Japan are normally considered safe places for     since both countries are allies. But relations with both could prove challenging in the coming years as Italy faces crucial national elections and Japan recovers from Mr. Trump’s cancellation of the   Partnership, a top Japanese priority. Sean Spicer, the new White House press secretary, opened his first full daily briefing with a quick joke about his lack of popularity among the press corps and a break with precedent: The first questions went to friendly outlets, not the wire services. After a very contentious exchange with reporters over the weekend, which drew angry condemnation on social media, Mr. Spicer noted that he had sent an email to Josh Earnest, his Democratic predecessor, who had been voted the most popular press secretary among reporters. “He can rest easy. His title is secure, at least for the next few days,” Mr. Spicer joked. Mr. Spicer largely ignored the longstanding precedent of calling on the wire services, network reporters and major news organizations. Instead, he called on The New York Post first, then the Christian Broadcasting Network. “Our intention is not to lie to you,” he told reporters, after a shaky start this weekend when he inflated the number of people at the president’s inauguration. Mr. Trump issued a fresh tax warning to corporate America on Monday morning, promising that his administration would introduce a “substantial” border tax that would make it expensive for businesses to move factories outside the country. “A company that wants to fire all of its people in the United States and build some factory someplace else, then thinks that product is going to just flow across the border into the United States,” Mr. Trump said  —   “that’s just not going to happen. ” How such a tax would work is in question. Would a company like General Motors that already has a plant in Mexico be hit by the tax, or would it affect only companies that move operations overseas once the law passes? What about Apple, which has contracts with manufacturers in China but doesn’t manufacture there itself? Mr. Trump, who plans to withdraw the United States from the   Partnership trade agreement, rejected the notion that he was   but insisted that his first priority as president is to put American workers first on such deals. “What we want is fair trade” Mr. Trump said. “We’re going to treat countries fairly, but they have to treat us fairly. ” Trying to ease concerns among American business executives about a border tax, Mr. Trump said that the solution was easy: Stay in the United States. “If you stay here, there’s no tax,” he said. “All you have to do is stay. ” Julia Hahn, a young writer for the website Breitbart, is expected to join the White House as an aide working with her former boss, Mr. Bannon, the president’s chief strategist. Ms. Hahn’s exact title and duties are unclear, although one White House official, who was not authorized to speak publicly because Ms. Hahn has not yet been formally hired, said that there were a number of   positions open and she would slide into one. But Ms. Hahn wrote several Breitbart articles savaging House Speaker Paul D. Ryan over his past support for comprehensive immigration reform and his criticism of Mr. Trump during the campaign. “He’s With Her: Inside Paul Ryan’s   Campaign to Elect Hillary Clinton President,” blared the headline on one piece in October. During the transition period, Mr. Ryan and Mr. Bannon, who was the chairman of Breitbart, are said to have begun to develop a relationship. And aides to Mr. Ryan came away from a meeting on tax reform with Mr. Bannon and other senior advisers to the president describing Mr. Bannon as the only one with a nuanced understanding of policy. Ms. Hahn would represent an expansion of Mr. Bannon’s growing sway within the White House, as he aligns with the president’s    and senior adviser, Jared Kushner, to develop a governing philosophy for the new administration. In the 2016 election cycle, Sheldon Adelson, the megadonor and casino magnate, was the nearly $125 million man. Mr. Adelson had a prime seat at Mr. Trump’s swearing in on the West Front of the Capitol last week. And at a dinner honoring Vice President Mike Pence, the president singled out Mr. Adelson in the crowd. He mocked him for having been late to donate but also said that the total amount he gave to “super PACs” was roughly $125 million. Two people close to Mr. Adelson described that figure as accurate. Mr. Trump, in his remarks, went on to criticize super PACs and to describe them as vehicles for consultants to get rich. Mr. Adelson is said to have donated through several vehicles, including to groups supporting congressional Republicans. Still, Mr. Adelson’s largess was consequential to Mr. Trump during the campaign. He was one of the earliest donors to support Mr. Trump, a fellow casino developer, once it became clear he would be the nominee. During difficult stretches toward the end Mr. Trump’s race, when Mr. Adelson was pushed to donate more cash, he expressed concern about doing so unless Mr. Trump gave more of his own money to the campaign, according to two people briefed on those discussions. Mr. Adelson’s singular focus is the safety of Israel, and one of his concerns is that the administration follow through with a vow to move the United States Embassy to Jerusalem. Before his rise to Mr. Trump’s White House, Sean Spicer, the press secretary, was known around Washington as the somewhat beleaguered communications chief at the Republican National Committee, and before that, a spokesman around Republican quarters of the House. But his brushes with the news media  —   and ensuing raw feelings  —   go further back than that, to his school days at Connecticut College, where he was a student government senator and his relationship with The College Voice was, shall we say, not terribly cordial. He may have even coined the meme “Sad!” It started in April 1993, when The College Voice’s “This Week in Assembly” column detailed an amendment to ensure that an antismoking regulation would not affect existing rules for the creation of smoking and nonsmoking rooms for exams, sponsored by one “Sean Sphincter. ” That May, The College Voice allowed that Mr. Spicer was “unintentionally misidentified” and that the paper “regrets the error. ” This did not satisfy Mr. Spicer, who dashed off an angry letter to the editor about the article “in which my name was ‘misspelled. ’” “While those involved claimed that this was a copy joke that went unnoticed, I believe that it was a malicious and intentional attack. For a paper which claims to be run by ‘professional’ standards, I find it a bit sad that this type of reporting is explained as a simple part of production. ” The White House press secretary’s emphatic insistence that 1. 5 million people attended Mr. Trump’s inauguration has become quite the national punch line. The Dallas Stars got into the act: So did this guy: Even Steve Kerr, the coach of the Golden State Warriors and former pro player, was having fun with it. Mr. Trump announced that he will nominate former Representative Heather Wilson as secretary of the Air Force, making her the first graduate of the Air Force Academy to serve in the role. Ms. Wilson, a Republican, represented New Mexico in the House from 1998 to 2009 but lost two races for the Senate. Since 2013, she has served as president of the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology. Her name had been floated for other administration positions, including director of national intelligence. The new president is still on Twitter, naturally, but he apparently hasn’t decided where his followers are to look. On his old @realDonaldTrump feed on Monday morning, he offered up a little bit of news for the day ahead. The @POTUS account, intermittently used by President Barack Obama and usually a tad dull, has become a propaganda arm of the Trump White House, with exaltations, quotations and photographs  —   and a profile pic of the new president that is pure Trump. The White House did move the president’s initial @realDonaldTrump post on Monday morning to the official account, 23 minutes later. Perhaps his advisers can nudge him away from a personal account that technically he shouldn’t be using, according to the same rules that he cited when he blasted Hillary Clinton for her personal email server. A longer look at his daily schedule is here: Separately, Mr. Trump’s    opposition is pushing #MuteMonday, encouraging people to unfollow @realDonaldTrump and @POTUS, find a new leader to follow and share their choice. The bipartisan leadership of the House and Senate are scheduled to go to the White House on Monday for what is billed as a casual reception with Mr. Trump. At the inaugural luncheon after Mr. Trump’s   on Friday, Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, spent a good 15 minutes yakking with Mr. Trump, apparently to express displeasure with the president’s cabinet nominees, in particular Representative Tom Price of Georgia, the nominee to be secretary of health and human services. The session will be the president’s first extended opportunity to look for common ground with Democrats, who have denounced his messages and policy priorities, including his executive order on Saturday to pave the way for weakening the requirements of the Affordable Care Act. He will also have a chance to discuss potential bipartisan initiatives, including his $1 trillion infrastructure spending plan. Mr. Trump has high hopes for his relationship with Capitol Hill. He declared on Friday, just minutes after being sworn in, that “we all want the same thing,” regardless of political party, and, “we’re going to get along. ” Monday’s   gathering will be a first test. Mr. Schumer is slated to be at the Monday meeting with Senators Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, and John Cornyn of Texas, the No. 2 Republican Mr. Ryan and Representatives Kevin McCarthy of California, the majority leader, Nancy Pelosi of California, the minority leader, and Steny Hoyer of Maryland, the minority whip. Notably, Mr. Trump is set to meet alone with Mr. Ryan afterward. Nominees are likely to be only one of the topics. Mr. Tillerson appears likely to win Senate confirmation, close relationship with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and all. But senators are still wary of the Russia connections. Mr. Schumer and Senator Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland, the ranking Democrat on the Foreign Relations Committee, are introducing legislation that would require a congressional vote to lift the sanctions that were imposed on Russia after its annexation of Crimea from Ukraine and proxy war in that former Soviet state. The two senators will emphasize that the legislation will also cover sanctions imposed just weeks ago by Mr. Obama after intelligence agencies concluded that Russia had interfered with the 2016 election in hopes of helping elect Mr. Trump. The measure, modeled after a law that required a congressional vote on the Iran nuclear deal, is expected to have bipartisan support, as that legislation did.

0 - In the fall of 2012, a    fisherman and carver named Terry St. Germain decided to enroll his five young children as members of the Nooksack, a federally recognized Native American tribe with some 2, 000 members, centered in the northwestern corner of Washington State. He’d enrolled his two older daughters, from a previous relationship, when they were babies, but hadn’t yet filed the paperwork to make his younger children  —   all of whom, including a set of twins, were under 7  —   official members. He saw no reason to worry about a bureaucratic endorsement of what he knew to be true. “My kids, they love being Native,” he told me. St. Germain was a teenager when he enrolled in the tribe. For decades, he used tribal fishing rights to harvest salmon and sea urchin and Dungeness crab alongside his cousins. He had dozens of family members who were also Nooksack. His mother, according to family lore, was directly descended from a   Nooksack chief known as Matsqui George. His brother, Rudy, was the secretary of the Nooksack tribal council, which oversaw membership decisions. The process, he figured, would be so straightforward that his kids would be certified Nooksacks in time for Christmas, when the tribe gives parents a small stipend for buying gifts: “I thought it was a    situation. ” But after a few months, the applications had still not gone through. When Rudy asked why, at a tribal council meeting, the chairman, Bob Kelly, called in the enrollment department. They told Rudy that they had found a problem with the paperwork. There were missing documents ancestors seemed to be incorrectly identified. They didn’t think Terry’s children’s claims to tribal membership could be substantiated. At the time, Rudy and Kelly were friends, allies on the council. At the long oval table where they met to discuss Nooksack business, Rudy always sat at Kelly’s right. But the debate over whether Rudy’s family qualified as Nooksack tore them apart. Today, more than four years later, they no longer speak. Rudy and his extended family refer to Kelly as a monster and a dictator he calls them pond scum and con artists. They agree on almost nothing, but both remember the day when things fell apart the same way. “If my nephew isn’t Nooksack,” Rudy said in the council chambers, “then neither am I. ” To Rudy, the words were an expression of shock. “It’s fighting words,” he said, to tell someone they’re not really part of their tribe. At stake were not just his family’s jobs and homes and treaty rights but also who they were and where they belonged. “I’ll still be who I am, but I won’t have proof,” Rudy said. “I’ll be labeled a  . So yeah, I take this very personally. ” To Kelly, the words were an admission of guilt, implicating not just the St. Germains but also hundreds of tribal members to whom they were related. As chairman, he felt that he had a sacred duty: to protect the tribe from invasion by a group of people that, he would eventually argue, weren’t even Native Americans. “I’m in a war,” he told me later, sketching family trees on the back of a copy of the tribe’s constitution. “This is our culture, not a game. ” The St. Germains’ rejected application proved to be a turning point for the Nooksack. Separately, the family and the council began combing through Nooksack history, which, like that of many tribes in the United States, is complicated by government efforts to extinguish, assimilate and relocate the tribe, and by a dearth of historical documents. An international border drawn across historically Nooksack lands only adds to the confusion. There were some records and even some living memories of the ancestors whose Nooksack heritage was being called into doubt. But no one could agree on what the records meant. In January 2013, Kelly announced that, after searching through files at the Bureau of Indian Affairs office in nearby Everett, he had reason to doubt the legitimacy of more than 300 enrolled Nooksacks related to the St. Germains, all of whom claimed to descend from a woman named Annie George, born in 1875. In February, he canceled the constitutionally required council meeting, saying it would be “improper” to convene when Rudy St. Germain and another council member, Rudy’s cousin Michelle Roberts, were not eligible to be part of the tribe they’d been elected to lead. A week later, he called an executive session of the council but demanded that St. Germain and Roberts remain outside while the rest of the council voted on whether to “initiate involuntary disenrollment” for them and 304 other Nooksacks, including 37 elders. The resolution passed unanimously. “It hurt me,” Terry St. Germain said later. Even harder was watching the effect on his brother, Rudy. “It took the wind right out of him. ” Two days after the meeting, the tribal council began sending out letters notifying affected members that unless they could provide proof of their legitimacy, they would be disenrolled in 30 days. Word and shock spread quickly through the small,   reservation. The disenrollees, now calling themselves “the Nooksack 306,” hired a lawyer and vowed to contest their expulsion. “I told ’em, ‘I know where I belong no matter what you say,’’u2009” an    woman who, in her youth, had been punished for “speaking Indian” at school, said. “’u2009‘You can’t make me believe that I’m not. ’’u2009” The Nooksacks who want the 306 out of the tribe say they are standing up for their very identity, fighting for the integrity of a tribe taken over by outsiders. “We’re ready to die for this,” Kelly would later say. “And I think we will, before this is over. ” Outside the lands legally known as “Indian Country,” “membership” and “enrollment” are such blandly bureaucratic words that it’s easy to lose sight of how much they matter there. To the 566 federally recognized tribal nations, the ability to determine who is and isn’t part of a tribe is an essential element of what makes tribes sovereign entities. To individuals, membership means citizenship and all the emotional ties and treaty rights that come with it. To be disenrolled is to lose that citizenship: to become stateless. It can also mean the loss of a broader identity, because recognition by a tribe is the most accepted way to prove you are Indian  —   not just Nooksack but Native American at all. Efforts to define Native American identity date from the earliest days of the colonies. Before the arrival of white settlers, tribal boundaries were generally fluid intermarriages and alliances were common. But as the new government’s desire to expand into Indian Territory grew, so, too, did the interest in defining who was and who wasn’t a “real Indian. ” Those definitions shifted as the colonial government’s goals did. “Mixed blood” Indians, for example, were added to rolls in hopes that assimilated Indians would be more likely to cede their land later, after land claims were established, more restrictive definitions were adopted. In the 19th century, the government began relying heavily on blood quantum, or “degree of Indian blood,” wagering that, over generations of intermarriage, tribes would be diluted to the point that earlier treaties would not have to be honored. “’u2009‘As long as grass grows or water runs’  —   a phrase that was often used in treaties with American Indians  —   is a relatively permanent term for a contract,” the Ojibwe author David Treuer wrote in a 2011   for The Times. “’u2009‘As long as the blood flows’ seemed measurably shorter. ” Even for those early rolls, though, determining blood quantum was tricky it was not a measure that tribal people used or something they kept track of. Government agents compiling base rolls in the 1800s sometimes simply guessed at the percentage of Indian blood at the time, anthropologists used feet and hair width as a “scientific” test of blood degree in indigenous tribes. Many traditionalist Indians, known as “irreconcilables” or “blanket Indians,” were so suspicious of the government that they refused to be enrolled at all, making all their descendants unenrollable as well. In 1988 the historian Kent Carter coined a   term for the millions who claim Indian ancestry but who, for a variety of reasons, don’t sort neatly into today’s official boxes: people with mixed tribal heritage people whose ancestors were denied recognition by early government agents or died before registration was complete people whose tribes, in the face of the federal government’s attempts to extinguish them, didn’t maintain the cohesion that same government would later require for recognition. Carter called them the “outalucks. ” Contemporary Indian identity is refracted through a tangled accumulation of   and   understandings of biology and race, as well as several centuries’ worth of conflicting federal policies. The Constitution uses the word “Indian” twice but never bothers to define it. A congressional survey in 1978 found that, in addition to the different requirements used by tribes and individual states, federal legislation defined Native Americans in at least 33 ways. In 2005, one frustrated judge, quoting an earlier decision, described the legal definitions of   as “’u2009‘a complex patchwork of federal, state and tribal law,’ which is better explained by history than by logic. ” Given the web of criteria, courts are sometimes called upon to decide whether individuals, or even tribes, are “authentically” Indian. This has led to weighing things like whether   128ths constitutes a “significant degree” of Indian blood (a federal court ruled in 2009 that it did) whether someone who was “Indian in an anthropological or   sense” was also Indian for the purposes of criminal jurisdiction if his tribe isn’t federally recognized (the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals decided he was not) and whether behaviors like eating fast food and driving cars show that a tribe’s culture had been abandoned and its land rights “extinguished” (in 1991, a Canadian court said that they did the ruling was later overturned). Modern Native Americans  —   who in 2017 are still issued cards by the federal government certifying their “Degree of Indian Blood”  —   are used to, if not necessarily comfortable with, the need to “prove” their identities in ways that may seem strange to people of other ethnicities. Tribes set their own membership requirements, but in order to be recognized by the federal government, they must also prove their historical continuity and have generally hewed to the methods it has established. Tribes have on occasion been warned that federal recognition, and thus their   rights, can disappear if their membership becomes unclear. When, in 1994, the Blackfeet Nation considered doing away with its   requirement, a Bureau of Indian Affairs official warned that a tribe that “diluted” its relationship with its members might find that “it has ‘ ’ its sovereignty away. ” Today, most tribes use direct descent from tribal members listed on historical rolls and blood quantum. For a 2003 book, “Real Indians: Identity and the Survival of Native America,” the Cherokee scholar Eva Marie Garroutte interviewed Native people about what it felt like to be defined in this way. Many said they saw blood quantum as a helpful guidepost and a guard against fraud or against people who identify as Indian without cultural understanding. Others regarded it as odd, even offensive. An Ojibwe man joked that he is also “part white, but I don’t have the papers to prove it. ” A    woman replied, “I don’t like being talked about in a vocabulary usually reserved for dogs and horses. ” Lately, though, old debates about identity have taken a harsh new direction. Loss of tribal acceptance, which was once rare and seldom permanent, has become increasingly common over the last two decades. David Wilkins, a professor of American Indian studies at the University of Minnesota who has followed the phenomenon since the   says there has been a surge in disenrollment that involves between 5, 000 and 9, 000 people in 79 tribes across 20 states. Even the dead have been disenrolled and, in some cases, exhumed from their graves, against tradition and taboo, to have their DNA tested. The ejection of tribal members is most prevalent in small tribes with casinos on their land “per capita” profit shares go further when split fewer ways. Many of the most famous cases have been in California: Following the opening of a new tribal casino in 2003, the Chukchansi, in Coarsegold, disenrolled more than half of approximately 1, 600 tribal members, and battles among factions eventually led to an armed takeover of the casino. But disenrollment also happens where casino money isn’t a major factor (the Nooksack have one casino and another recently closed, but don’t make enough money from gaming to issue per capita payments) or isn’t a factor at all, as in tribes where factions hope to consolidate political power or settle grudges or simply believe that people were mistakenly let in. Robert Williams, chairman of the Indigenous Peoples Law and Policy Program at the University of Arizona, told me that some tribes have recently begun to hire membership consultants to help trim their rolls. “It’s almost become an industry in some parts of Indian Country,” he said. The National Native American Bar Association issued a resolution in 2015 denouncing loss of membership without due process, while the Association of American Indian Physicians warned that such loss of identity could cause serious grief and depression. In general, though, the voices against disenrollment have been few. A 1978 Supreme Court decision, Santa Clara Pueblo v. Martinez, held that, due to its sovereignty, a tribe cannot be sued for discrimination for accepting the children of male members who married outside the tribe but not those of female members who did. It has been widely interpreted as giving tribes the right to determine their membership requirements, even if individual rights are compromised. The Bureau of Indian Affairs, out of respect for sovereignty, has repeatedly declined to intervene in internal membership disputes. Native leaders, leery of inviting scrutiny that could undermine tribal sovereignty, have been reluctant to speak out. “They tend to view any interference in such matters as an intrusion of the thin end of an infinitely expandable wedge against which they must exercise constant vigilance,” writes Garroutte. Ron Allen, the chairman of the Jamestown S’Klallam  —   a Western Washington tribe that disenrolled six members for insufficient blood quantum  —   says that “the topic is rising” and eliciting strong emotions, but it’s not appropriate to tell other tribes what to do: “It would be like Oregon saying to Washington, ‘You’re not managing your affairs properly. ’’u2009” Of the sweeping lands that historically made up Nooksack territory  —   it once stretched from the glaciated heights of Mt. Baker to the rocky shores of Puget Sound  —   the tribe now owns about 2, 500 acres, bought from private owners in the last 50 years. The reservation is centered in Deming, an unincorporated town of a few hundred people, with pockets of tribal housing scattered beyond it. Most Nooksack tribal members do not live on the reservation many of them, or their ancestors, followed opportunities in the more developed southern Sound or in other parts of the country. Adelina   64, lives across the Sound, closer to the Olympic Mountains. A   of Annie George, the common ancestor who unites the Nooksack disenrollees, and a cousin of Rudy and Terry St. Germain’s mother, she was among the first of the 306 accepted as Nooksack decades ago. One afternoon as we sat on her porch watching ships come and go from Seattle, she showed me the letter the tribe sent her in 1983, announcing her new membership. Overhead, a bald eagle wheeled inside, her husband, a painter, made sketches for a portrait of Annie George. He was working from an old, grainy photograph that he wasn’t sure depicted George. A relative found it in a shed, and the features were indistinct. “Once you title something,” he said, laughing, “it is what you say it is. ” After she got her letter of acceptance,   recalled, she was quick to tell her family, and then to write back to the enrollment director: “We were all jubilant, laughing, full of joy, jumping, screaming, crying, and the greatest overwhelming feeling of belonging somewhere. ” She was proud, she wrote, to finally know where she came from, “and prouder still to be a Nooksack Indian. ”   didn’t set out to be a member of the Nooksack tribe. She grew up well south of Nooksack lands, following her parents as they sought work in the fields, orchards and canneries of Washington State. Her father was Filipino and her mother was Indian, raised on a Shxway reserve in British Columbia. Her mother always said she was part Shxway, a Canadian band within the Stolo nation, through her grandfather, and part Nooksack, through her grandmother Annie George. Annie George’s three daughters  —    ’s grandmother and her two aunts  —   all married Filipino farmworkers. The family spoke Halkomelem, a native language that was widely spoken in what is now British Columbia but also in the Nooksack River valley until the   century it eventually largely replaced the original Nooksack language, Lhechalosem. As a child,   would sometimes drive north with her mother to visit family, and they would stop off in Nooksack territory to visit a man they called Uncle Louis. In 1983,   her mother and one of her   decided they wanted to learn more about their heritage. They went to the Bureau of Indian Affairs office in Everett, Wash. and then to the Nooksack enrollment office in Deming, to work on a family tree.  ’s mother told the enrollment director that her grandmother’s name was Annie George, and that her grandmother’s siblings had been named Louis, Amanda, Frank and William. Annie George wasn’t on the family trees the tribe had, and she wasn’t listed on any of the censuses it used, but Louis George was on a Nooksack tribal census from 1942. In a probate document, they found Annie’s name: Four interviewees described her as Louis’s half sister. The enrollment director encouraged the women to apply for membership, and they did. Within a month, the council sent them word that they had been accepted.   was the 777th enrolled member of the Nooksack tribe. Many of her relatives quickly followed. (Some also enrolled, separately, as Shxway.) As more houses became available, more members of the three families moved to reservation lands. Before long, the descendants of Annie George became an influential voting bloc, and their members were being elected to council seats and hired to run tribal offices. While some elders welcomed them, others were skeptical. The sisters had never lived on Nooksack land. Some elders had no memory of them others remembered them visiting but thought of them as Shxway. Kelly heard, indirectly, that elders in British Columbia didn’t remember the sisters’ being born there, but rather, showing up suddenly as young children  —   the beginning of his suspicions that, though they “had teachings,” the sisters weren’t Annie’s real daughters at all but   children she had taken in. Roberts showed me copies of two of the sisters’ birth certificates, reissued later in their lives, listing Annie and her husband as their parents. Other members of the tribe remembered knowing some of the 306 further south in the 1950s, when their families were doing agricultural work at the time, they said, the families identified as Filipino. They certainly hadn’t been around in the 1960s or ’70s, when the tribe was writing its constitution  —   when, as Kelly put it, the council “took a look around at who was here when they passed it, and they wrote their criteria for that, based on who was here  —   this is who Nooksack’s going to be. ” The debate continued into the 1990s, when the tribe did an enrollment audit of one of the three families descended from Annie’s daughters, the Rabangs. They were ultimately found to be enrollable, but not before an ugly confrontation. In 2000, after a number of Rabangs were arrested for smuggling marijuana into the United States from Canada, some elders told The Associated Press that “a clan of outsiders masquerading as Nooksacks” was “controlling tribal government. ” Bob Kelly now calls   and the other first enrollees from her extended family “Trojan horses. ” The Nooksack, as is the case with many tribes, have not always been known by their modern name. Rather, Nooksack, which is also rendered Noxwsá7aq, was the name of one of many villages scattered along what is now called the Nooksack River. When white settlers arrived in the   century, they applied the name of the village to all the people in the valley. Noxwsá7aq translates to “always bracken fern roots,” on which people of the village are said to have subsisted during a time of famine. One tribal member told me that she thinks the name captures something of what it means to be Nooksack. It makes her feel like a survivor. That’s a fair description of Nooksack history, especially in the last few hundred years. For centuries, the people fished their own river valley but also traveled regularly, including to what is now Canada’s Fraser River, to fish for salmon or gather shellfish. They intermarried and formed alliances with their neighbors on both sides of what is now an international border. When white settlers arrived and introduced new diseases, many of the Nooksack died. By some counts their numbers plummeted to 450 from perhaps 1, 200. In the 1855 Treaty of Point Elliot, in which Coast Salish tribes ceded their lands to the federal government in exchange for small reservations and the right to continue fishing, hunting and gathering, the Nooksack received no reservation. Instead, as settlers moved onto their lands, they were told to go live with the Lummi, in their new reservation by the coast. Most refused. Of those who remained, some filed homestead claims on their own lands others scattered in search of a livelihood. For the next hundred years, as far as the federal government was concerned, the tribe essentially ceased to exist. This is not an unusual story. The federal government used the law as “a mighty, pulverizing engine to break up the tribal mass,” as Teddy Roosevelt said to Congress in 1901. He was referring to the General Allotment Act, under which tribally owned land was carved into small parcels and handed out to individuals. It was a huge blow to the stability and sovereignty of tribes: Within 20 years, Native people lost ownership of 90 million acres. It was also the beginning of the government’s reliance on blood quantum to determine Indian status. Those deemed “ ” or less were regarded as more responsible and given more freedom to handle their land. Even many “progressive” reformers saw assimilation into white society as the best way to transform tribal members into citizens. “Kill the Indian in the student so we can save the man!” went the famous slogan of a superintendent at one of the 500 boarding schools that Native children, forcibly separated from their families, were made to attend. Some Nooksack people, unrecognized by the federal government, stayed on their lands and continued to operate as a tribe. In the 1920s, they joined other Northwest tribes to sue the federal government for lands lost in the 1930s, even though they weren’t considered eligible to participate, they voted to accept the Indian Reorganization Act, in which the government backed away from its assimilationist policies and instead encouraged tribes to be   and  . (A decade later the United States ended its    relationships with tribes and returned to promoting assimilation, before changing its policies and pushing   again.) In the 1960s, a committee of Nooksacks opened a bid for federal recognition. They gained title to one acre of land in Deming, the first Nooksack Reservation, in 1970, and full federal recognition in 1973. Like many tribes, they adopted a constitution based on a model that the Bureau of Indian Affairs developed during the reorganization period in the 1930s. The new constitution restricted Nooksack membership to recipients of early land allotments, recipients of a 1965 government settlement or people who appeared on a 1942 tribal census. Their direct descendants could also be enrolled, provided they had “at least   ( ) degree Indian blood. ” The Nooksack weren’t alone in seeing   applicants turn up after the tribe was officially recognized. Ron Allen, the tribal chairman of the Jamestown S’Klallam, told me it was common, in the last decades of the 20th century, for the “  communities” of northwestern tribes to be surprised by a “wave” of people who started coming back to places their families once left. He credits the political advancement of tribes, which made members of the broader society feel that it was “O. K. to be Indian. ” Tribes generally welcomed the new arrivals, he said, but still, “it was like, ‘Where are all these Indians coming from? ’’u2009” The most outspoken critics of disenrollment call it a form of genocide. Others don’t go quite so far but still view the practice as an outgrowth of policies designed to suppress Native American identity  —   “to control us, to assimilate us, and ultimately, to extinguish us,” as John McCoy, a Washington State senator and member of the Tulalip Tribes, neighbors to the Nooksack, wrote in an   for the Indian Country Media Network earlier this year. Robert Williams, of the University of Arizona, argues that disenrollment is a remnant of “colonialism and good   American racism, with Indians left to deal with the mess. ” In a 2015 tweet, Sherman Alexie, the Spokane and Coeur d’Alene author, put it even more emphatically: “Dear Indian tribes who disenroll members, you should be ashamed of your colonial and capitalistic bullshit. ” The first person to reply to Alexie’s tweet  —   thanking him for speaking out when others were silent  —   was Gabe Galanda, a member of the Round Valley Indian tribes in California and the lawyer whom the Nooksack 306 hired to represent them. The next replies came from some of Galanda’s other clients: former members of the Confederated Tribes of Grand Ronde, who were disenrolled in 2014. Grand Ronde was formed in 1857 when the federal government forced at least 27 tribes and bands to leave their homelands, which ranged from California to Washington, and move to a reservation in Oregon. The 86 Grand Ronde disenrollees descend from a man known as Chief Tumulth, who signed one of the treaties that created the reservation. Decades after they enrolled, tribal officials noted that Chief Tumulth failed to appear on the official base roll, made the year it was founded. It was true: He was hanged the year before, by a lieutenant of the U. S. Army. I thought of this last spring as I watched   leaf through old letters and family trees, newspaper clippings and documents. “We didn’t make the laws,” she said. “We just got stuck in the middle. ” After the first disenrollment letters went out to Nooksack members, Galanda appealed to tribal courts and the Department of the Interior and managed to delay the disenrollment hearings. Meanwhile, the 306 tried to make sense of what documents they could find to illuminate their past. They had no birth certificate for Annie, so they turned to old censuses and to   church records kept by the Archdiocese of Vancouver, marking the sacraments of birth, marriage and death. They found that Annie’s birth mother, Marie Siamat, was buried in December 1875, two days after giving birth to Annie, and that her father (variously recorded as Chief Matsqui, George Kot kro itmentwh, George Roelkwemeldon, George Tekwomclko, George Matsqui and so on) remarried a woman named Madeline Jobe. Indian censuses taken during Annie’s childhood repeatedly recorded her living with George and Madeline. Michelle Robert’s grandmother remembers her mother, Annie, referring to Madeline as the woman who raised her and as “Mother. ” The 306 think this is compelling evidence Madeline adopted Annie. The council remains unconvinced. Kelly says that citing Madeline as an ancestor  —   their only tie to recognized base rolls  —   was a blatant lie. If Madeline didn’t count, the family responded, they should still qualify for membership under Section H of the Nooksack constitution, which allows the enrollment of “persons who possess at least ¼ Indian blood and who can prove Nooksack ancestry to any degree. ” Records indicate that Matsqui was considered a Nooksack village even after the Canadian border was established to the south, and Matsqui George was a chief of the village. In a U. S. census from 1910, Louis George indicated that both his parents, Madeline and Matsqui George, were Nooksacks from Washington, and that he was a   Nooksack. Besides, the 306 like to point out, Kelly’s own family was adopted by the Nooksacks it is originally from a different Canadian tribe. Kelly suggested that the 306 disenroll themselves and reapply under Section H. But he soon called for a referendum to remove Section H from the Nooksack constitution. He said later that this change was unrelated to the 306 and was instead a   tightening of loose enrollment laws that could have let “almost anybody” in. The amendment passed with 61 percent support. As part of their defense, the 306 produced letters from anthropologists. One cited not just the requirements for Nooksack membership provided in tribal code but “historical documents, family oral history and   concepts of identity, affiliation and membership within anthropology regarding the social organization of the Coast Salish peoples. ” But for some tribal members, this only served to undermine his case. “It’s not a club,” a woman named Mary Brewer, who recently gave up her membership in the Lummi tribe to enroll as a Nooksack, told me. “My mom has about 10 different tribes in her ancestry, and she meets the requirements for only two. ” Their family lost title to 80 acres on the Yakima reservation because they didn’t have high enough blood quantum to be enrolled there they were sorry to lose the land, she said, but respected the rules by which modern tribes operate. Brewer’s mother, Diane, said she had two grandchildren whose blood quantum is  . “We’ve been telling them, better marry Native or else it’ll die out,” she said. “The 306 say, ‘Disenrollment isn’t traditional,’’u2009” Mary said. “Well, enrollment was never traditional!” It is, however, the way things work now. “It’s not, ‘this guy took care of me, and that’s how we did it in the olden days,’’u2009” Brewer continued. “If you don’t have documentation, then you’re not Indian. ” In more than 30 years of membership, Annie’s descendants became interwoven in the life of the tribe. They married other Nooksacks and had kids those kids had kids. But once the disenrollment process began, people chose sides. “It was just like a light switch,” Elizabeth Oshiro, one of the 306, told me. People she knew for years “all of a sudden had a different heart. ” With the hearings repeatedly delayed as lawsuits made their way through the tribal court system, both sides formed Facebook groups to argue their cases and regularly debated or taunted each other online. (Their competing slogans were “We Belong” and “We Are Nooksack. ”) “While some people challenge the idea of tribal enrollment, referring to it as ‘Western thinking’ and an imposed system on American Indians,” posted Katrice Romero, the tribe’s housing director, “that tribal enrollment number is what holds the United States government accountable to the American Indian people and its trust responsibility to tribes a responsibility that my ancestors fought, struggled and sacrificed for. ” On the reservation, Michelle Roberts found that people who babysat for her as a child or attended her wedding would no longer make eye contact with her. “The most important thing isn’t friendship,” says Diane Brewer, who no longer speaks to her former best friend, one of the 306. “The most important thing is the tribe. ” In the summer of 2013, Roberts was fired from her job as the   manager at the Nooksack River Casino. Later, when she tried to count the number of disenrollees and their allies who lost tribal jobs, she got to 58. At first, Kelly told me he wouldn’t comment on personnel decisions but later said, “We got rid of all them a long time ago. ” Rudy St. Germain was fired from his job as the casino’s landscaping manager and had to move his two boys into a relative’s house when he couldn’t make rent. “Those were dark days,” he told me. Today he works in a   plant. Roberts and St. Germain couldn’t find resolution in the council. Kelly began insisting that meetings be held over the phone. He’d received threats, he said, and it wasn’t safe to meet in person. When St. Germain and Roberts spoke, no one seemed to be able to hear them. I asked Kelly whether he muted them. He shrugged and said: “Probably. I muted a lot of people. ” (He says they weren’t supposed to be on the call in the first place.) The following winter, Kelly scheduled the first   council meetings in months on the Friday, Saturday and Monday of Martin Luther King Jr. Day weekend the Nooksack constitution allows for council members to be removed from office if they miss three monthly council meetings in a row. St. Germain and Roberts, who were out of town, tried to reach the council by phone or email. At the third meeting, the council declared their seats empty and appointed two new members to replace them. “It was the only way we could get them off council,” Kelly told me later. Rudy said, “I was lost for words. ” By that time, Kelly was calling the 306 scam artists. “Nobody stepped forward and claimed them!” he told me repeatedly. “You don’t show up and just insert yourself into someone else’s family tree. ” With an election looming and four of eight council seats expiring, the council asked the tribal court judge to keep pending disenrollees from voting. After the judge refused, the council declined to schedule the elections. The incumbents remained in office, but some argued that, without an elected quorum, the tribe had no viable government. Several lawsuits, including one called Kelly v. Kelly, brought by a group that included the chairman’s sons, were filed to force elections, but amid litigation, the council abruptly fired the tribe’s judge. The council also barred Galanda from practicing in the tribe’s courts, saying he’d behaved unethically by citing an opinion he wrote while serving as a judge for another tribe the court began to return all of his filings unopened. An appellate court directed the chief of police to arrest and imprison the court clerk if she continued to reject filings when the chief of police refused, the appellate court held him in contempt, began levying a fine of $1, 000 a day and wondered, in its ruling, if “at Nooksack, the rule of law is dead. ” (The council contends that, because the courts are under the jurisdiction of the council, these fines and rulings are meaningless.) Two of the remaining council members whose seats did not expire and who have resisted disenrollment (one is the mother of Kelly’s sons and is now married to one of the 306) were targeted with petitions calling for their recall. One of the recalls succeeded. The charge was treason. In July, some of the disenrollees and their allies scheduled what they called a general council meeting. To avoid the tribal police, they met on the grounds of an old logging show. Several people showed me text messages they received from tribal employees who said they’d been warned that they would be fired if they attended. Later, thinking Kelly might consider the meeting a kind of coup, I asked him what he thought of it. He shrugged. “It was meaningless,” he said. “It’s not real. It’s  . ” George Adams, who taught Lhechalosem language classes for the tribe until he was fired early last year (he’s such a fervent supporter of the 306 that he likes to call himself “307”) called the meeting to order he spoke in Lhechalosem, though he is considered the only remaining fluent speaker. (He learned the language by studying old recordings a quarter century after the last native speaker died.) Adams charged four witnesses with committing the proceedings to memory in order to later share what happened. “Remember these names,” he told the crowd, “because this is how we survived for thousands of years. ” People rose to speak. “My enrollment number is six, so there you go,” said one man, by way of introduction. Another said, “I’m 71 years old, and I’m kind of ashamed to call myself a Nooksack right now. Years ago, our people never asked, ‘Where you from?’ They welcomed you to their table. ” A woman asked how the decisions of this council could be considered valid when there were so few people, around 200, present. People began to speak of shutting down the tribe altogether, to force the Bureau of Indian Affairs, which had consistently declined to intervene, to call new elections. Adams asked for a vote. The crowd decided that the four expired seats on the tribal council were vacant, that everything the government had done since the canceled elections was invalid and that they should vote in four new officers  —   none of them disenrollees  —   from their own ranks. “This has to do with 10 generations from now,” one of the newly elected officers said. He described the   scenario: for lots of people to be cut off from the tribal community, “to be just a person roaming around, trying to figure it out for themselves. ” The new treasurer, Bernadine Roberts, a short,   woman (“Stand up please,” Adams told her. “Oh! You are standing! ”) who enrolled three years after the tribe was officially recognized, told me that until she moved to the reservation from Seattle, she “was one of those urban Indians that didn’t know much. ” She gave a brief acceptance speech about what it meant to her to reconnect to her family’s past. “My grandmother said we were going home, and I didn’t know what she was talking about,” she said. “But I know now. ” In July, after the meeting at the logging show, some of the Nooksack 306 joined in the intertribal Canoe Journey, an annual event in which hundreds of members from dozens of Northwest tribes spend weeks paddling the coast to and from one another’s lands for meals, dancing and ceremonies. They named their canoes  —     with seating for 15  —   for Annie’s daughters, and shared them with people of the Shxway band. Some Nooksacks told me this was ridiculous: the sharing with the Shxway, the names, participating at all. The Nooksack, they said, are known for racing narrow, fast war canoes, not paddling wide traveling canoes. Near the end of the journey, the canoes crossed Puget Sound and came to shore on a sandy beach in Seattle. George Adams, in the center canoe, stood and addressed two elders from the Muckleshoot tribe, which was hosting that day. “We are all one,” he said, “carrying on the tradition of knowing who you are and where you come from. ” The following month, the 306 celebrated what they saw as a hopeful precedent when the Grand Ronde Tribal Court of Appeals overturned the disenrollment of Chief Tumulth’s descendants, holding that it was unfair to subject tribal members to “such an extreme sanction” after accepting them for nearly three decades. Elsewhere, a few tribes have rejected disenrollment altogether. The Federated Indians of Graton Rancheria in California amended their constitution to ban disenrollment in 2013. The Spokane tribe of Washington did the same in 2015, as part of more than two dozen constitutional changes meant to better reflect the historical complexity of the tribe. But the Nooksack dispute dragged on. In October, the Bureau of Indian Affairs informed Kelly that it would not recognize any actions of the tribal council because it failed to hold elections in March 2016, stressing that it wasn’t telling the tribe who counted as a member but simply responding to the “exceedingly rare situation” of a council’s lacking a quorum. The tribe scheduled new elections and certified the results of a referendum to disenroll the 306. But the bureau would not recognize the results: by excluding pending disenrollees from voting, the tribe had violated its constitution and the rulings of its court of appeals. So when the 306 received letters informing them that their   disenrollment hearings had finally been scheduled to take place on the phone in November, they weren’t sure what to do. Some, including Rudy St. Germain, refused to participate on the grounds that the hearings were illegitimate. Others scheduled their appointments, then called in to tell the council they didn’t recognize its authority. Michelle Roberts called from Canada, where she was staying with Shxway friends. “Annie George was Nooksack because her father was Matsqui George, and he was Nooksack,” she said. “We are all Nooksack. I am Nooksack. I can’t say that more and mean it more. ” A voice came on the line. It was Bob Solomon, who holds one of the expired council seats and is a descendant of Madeline Jobe: “I have never heard anybody say that you were adopted by Madeline Jobe. You are not my relative through Madeline. ” “Yes, we are,” Roberts said, her voice rising. “The document proves it, my grandmother proves it, the oral history proves it. ” “That’s your story,” he said. “That’s not mine. ” A week later, the day before Thanksgiving, Kelly announced that the tribe had removed the names of “  who had been erroneously enrolled in the Tribe” from its membership list. Those who called and those who didn’t, all were gone. “It’s finally over,” he wrote. But of course it wasn’t over. The departments of Housing and Urban Development and Health and Human Services, which enforce the government’s treaty responsibilities to provide housing and health care to the tribe, did not recognize the disenrollment of the 306 and maintained they were still entitled to their services. In late December, the Bureau of Indian Affairs warned that the tribe’s failure to hold valid elections put all its federal funding at risk. There were now two sides offering two competing realities, each telling the other it was illegitimate. The 306 would be another chapter in the long, strange history of who decides who is  —   and who isn’t  —   an Indian.



########################################################################################################################

1 - Canada, our No. 1 pick for this year’s 52 Places to Go list, spans millions of square miles. It also contains multitudes, not just of people and locations, but of memories. We asked five Canadian authors to reflect on places that have lodged in their psyches. My mother always kept a bright yellow hard hat in her car, an unexpected accessory for a petite Hong Kong immigrant in her  . She was the senior purchaser for a British Columbia forestry company that, in lean years, laid off everyone in her department except her. (More’s the pity she dreamed of early retirement.) In the meantime, she shuttled between the province’s pulp and paper mills, doing the job of six people, negotiating contracts for hotels, log loaders, harvesters and more. One year, when I was 25, I finally said yes to her persistent invitations to tag along. She wanted me to meet the men and women who earned their living in the mill towns, and who called her by her English name, Matilda. We set out in her car, exploring the    of Vancouver Island, heading for the northern tip, Port Hardy. This would turn out to be the last trip we took together. I remember the wet October chill eagles descending over corridors of evergreens a seemingly endless highway. At twilight, the world took on the shifting depths of an Emily Carr painting. I had to put up with my mother’s terrible driving, and her devotion to Celine Dion. She had to put up with my moods. I was going through a breakup and had decided that, in order to strengthen my moral fiber, I should camp, alone, for three days in the woods. I instructed my mother to drop me off at my campsite, work for a few days in Port Hardy, and then pick me up again. Port Hardy is a microcosm of Canada: a   town with a complex human and environmental history. The archaeological site of the island’s oldest known human habitation (circa 5850 B. C.) the area is the place of origin for the Kwakiutl peoples. The land of the Kwakiutl, whose name translates to “smoke of the world,” was taken into ownership  —   both private and national  —   by gunpoint, dishonored treaties and restrictive and discriminatory laws. The scramble for artifacts and the theft of Kwakiutl art  —   work that was celebrated by Claude   as among the most sophisticated in the world  —   has meant that much of the community’s historical work is housed in museums elsewhere. After 1849, the Kwakiutl population was decimated, but it survives. In 2013, British Columbia was found to have once again breached the Kwakiutl’s 1851 Treaty rights. This is not a history I learned in school. Alone in the woods, I pitched my tent. The dark fell suddenly. I made it five hours before calling my mom, telling her I was afraid, and asking her to come get me. That night, we shared a bed in a small lodging provided by her company. I smelled of the fire I had briefly managed to start. It felt good to lie beside my mother in a place that was complex and old. A little over a year later, my mother died suddenly in a town where she was working, much like this one, on a November night when her heart gave out. It was her   two kind forestry men who, worried about my mother, entered her hotel room in the morning, to find her gone. So peaceful, they told us, as if she were only sleeping. Fourteen years later, I understand better how the smoke of the world is never still. Many of the mills my mother visited have closed, jobs have been lost, and, as of a decade ago, a staggering 75 percent of Vancouver Island’s productive   forest has been logged. It is a place that will tell us much about the balance between jobs and environmental stewardship, about our respect for First Nations treaty rights and our obligations to the land. This is the Canada still to come. Madeleine Thien is the author of “Do Not Say We Have Nothing. ” Grindstone Island is a   dot of green leaves and Victorian gingerbread structures in the middle of Big Rideau Lake, halfway between Kingston and Ottawa.   in the 19th century to make way for its eponymous grindstone quarry, the island later became the summer home of Charles Kingsmill, the first admiral of the Royal Canadian Navy, and served as a genteel hub for Ottawa society life. Kingsmill’s daughter, Diana, who had a lifelong association with pacifist Quakers, took over Grindstone and turned it into a nonviolent resistance education center, staging legendary   games that recreated the infamous Stanford Prison Experiment as a way to train the “prisoners” to fight oppression with noncooperation  —   a practice that ended after a disastrous fake “invasion” by a local biker gang retained for the purpose. I came to Grindstone as a young teenager in the   attending the annual summer camps run by the nonprofit cooperative the Quakers put together to manage the island. The camps’ explicit mission was to train a new generation of activists, another step on the ladder that they had climbed, through trade unionism, farmers’ unions, suffragism and feminism, to antiwar activism. Grindstone was full of kids like me:   babies who attended alternative public schools in Toronto, Kingston and Ottawa, who could rhyme the classic protest chant “   ” with the facility of lifelong practice. Today it sounds hopelessly idealistic. But in the ’80s, Grindstone was a perfect incubator for young activists. With its quiet paths, crisp lake swimming and isolated spots with names like Moonwatcher’s Point, the Grindstone experience was one part lazing around and chatting, one part intense, practical instruction. The Victorian cottages we slept in had once housed the political elites of Ottawa society and their celebrity friends. Now they were ours. I’ve always been an early riser, and it was on Grindstone that I became addicted to sunrises, swimming around the island to catch them on the still lake amid the loon calls, then rushing in a shiver back to my cabin to change for breakfast and morning meeting on the broad, shaded porch of the main lodge. As I graduated out of the summer camps, I became active in the maintenance and management of the island, volunteering in the kitchens and serving on the  ’s board. When the  ’s finances crashed with the   recession, we sold the island to a dentist from Kingston who planned to commute by small pontoon plane. I was devastated. Today, Grindstone is the private home of David Bearman and Jennifer Trant  —   museum technology pioneers who fell in love with the island the first time they saw it, immediately dissolved their successful consultancy and took up residence there, running small conferences for people interested in museums and the web. Five years ago my family and I were their guests. The island felt haunted by the ghosts of the friends I’d made there and the dreams we’d shared. It has been 25 years since I left Grindstone on its final weekend as a social justice education center, and not a week goes by without my yearning for it with a kind of joy and sorrow that is sunk very deep in my heart. I visit it in my dreams, and in the photo feeds from its current owners when I see them at museum conferences, I demand to know all the minutiae of the island’s upkeep, which trees survived the winter storms and what color they’re painting the porch this year. I live in Burbank, Calif. now, and I take my    daughter on hikes in the nearby mountains. Sometimes, when we sit on a trailside boulder and listen to the winds soughing in the trees, I can almost pretend that I’ve brought her back to Grindstone, the place I had always assumed I would raise my own family. Cory Doctorow is the author of the forthcoming novel “Walkaway” and a special adviser to the Electronic Frontier Foundation. The Hawker Siddeley HS 748 is a delightful,   turboprop relic of an airplane, with metal everywhere you expect plastic, made to land on gravel or ice. Nestled in a Hawker, I flew north from Whitehorse, Yukon’s capital city, past 300 miles of moonscape  —   gray craters scarred by the white lines of mining roads that seemed to loop and go nowhere  —   before Dawson City appeared through a hole in the cloud cover. The subarctic town, nicknamed “Paris of the North” during the late   Gold Rush, looked like a strange, solitary incursion on the land. I was there to spend three months living in the childhood home of the Canadian writer Pierre Berton, who had donated the house for this purpose. A volunteer picked me up at the   airport. On the drive through town, we passed a truck with an animal carcass in the bed, antlers poking out past a tarp.   black birds pecked at the exposed edges. “If you leave your moose out, the ravens will get at it,” the volunteer said. The Yukon River divided the town into Dawson proper and West Dawson, a scattered community of   cabins whose inhabitants hauled their own wood, water and propane. I walked down to the river almost every day. It was October, and the black, bottomless water flowed fast toward Alaska. Over the next few weeks, the river changed. First the water took on the faint sheen of an oil slick. Then slivers of ice began to race along the current, catching the light like the heads and bellies of surfacing seals. Then bigger,   chunks of ice formed, audibly colliding and jostling for space until they clustered and   at a bottleneck bend. Finally, one morning in November, I woke to an eerie, noticeable silence. I went down to the river’s beach sheets of ice overlapped where they’d heaved onto the shore, their exposed   resembling massive blocks of turquoise glass. A government employee had drilled into the ice and laid out orange flags indicating where the ice was thick enough to walk safely. I watched a dogsled cross. Because of the snow cover, it wasn’t immediately clear where the ground ended and the river began. As I stepped out, I could hear ice continuing to crack, the sound of trickling water running in open rivulets. Under my feet, I’d been told, ran water deep enough to swallow a truck. This would be a stupid way to die, I thought. Halfway across, I stopped and looked south, toward where the Yukon River met the Klondike River. At this time of year, the sun rose so late and set so early that it circled the horizon in a continuous blaze of orange. Part of the Canadian identity is that we’re a hardy people, thriving in the inhospitable north. It’s one of those myths so ingrained and pervasive that you believe it even if, like me  —   like most  —   you have lived your whole life in cities less than 60 miles north of the American border. For just a moment, my breath clouding around me, icicles forming on my chin, I stood in that mythical Canada. I crossed and hiked triumphantly around West Dawson, which had been inaccessible except by helicopter during the  . The temperature dropped below   degrees Celsius. When I returned to the house, hours later, I peeled off my jeans and saw that my thighs, like my cheeks and nose, were a raw, violent red. Out on the river, I had seen two other people crossing. The first glided past on   skis with a baby strapped to his chest. The second was an acquaintance pulling a sled. “Just picking up my mail!” he called. Kim Fu is the author of the novel “For Today I Am a Boy” and the poetry collection “How Festive the Ambulance. ”  Hans Johann was a capitalist pig farmer, a man who owned the pigs and the farm. His wife was Barbara. They were both German Mennonites. After World War II, both had fled with their families from what was once Prussia to Niagara, which is where, on some acres between the lake and the waterfalls, they stayed and became Mama and Papa, then Oma and Opa. My mother, Linda, was the fourth of Oma and Opa’s seven children, born and christened at such a rate that the family could not afford middle names. Mama made up for this by calling me “Sarah Nicole,” while my father, one of four from the suburbs, has never said anything but “Sarah. ” At home in London, Ontario, I sided with my dad, thinking two names were less smart than one but when we went to the pig farm, my name was turned by thick German tongues into “   . ” This older, extrinsic version of me was the one I liked best. Summers belonged to Niagara. Driving to the farm in a station wagon with no empty seats, we knew we were close when the asphalt turned to dirt and had arrived when the dirt turned to gravel. A long lane,   in birches, led to an ancient Mercedes or two and a big John Deere tractor, a nameless cat curled under the exhaust pipe. In the kitchen, we ate Oma’s bread with havarti cheese and   summer grapes, on which a skim of dust belied a   of gold. What did we need money for? Nothing. Ice cream, maybe, if we wanted it in a cone from Avondale Dairy. Turtles swam with us in the pool, the water cold and unchlorinated under scum, colored the dim vegetative green of fairy tales before they’re Americanized. Oma said her ferns would grow better if we urinated in the soil, and we rolled our eyes but did it, one at a time. I sneaked away to the gully, read my aunt’s ahistorical romance novels. My brother shot a dove with a BB gun. Pigs screamed in the barn. It seemed in those summers impossible that the sun could either burn me or fail to wake me up, that I could ever be sick for more than three days or have an allergy. I was no more friends with nature than I was friends with my kin, yet it seemed that nature and I felt the same way: indifferent to the rules, remote no matter how we were tamed. My grandfather is alive, freshly widowed. Though he no longer capitalizes on much or practices animal husbandry, he lives in the bungalow on the farm and makes and sells peach and grape jam. Everyone thinks they know what peach and grape jam taste like, but I maintain that Opa’s jam can make you forget what a fruit is. Sarah Nicole Prickett is a writer in New York and the founder of Adult Magazine.  A few years ago, I got to pick a small village to stay in for a while and write poetry. I chose the Missisquoi Valley, in the Eastern Townships of Quebec, because I liked what the bay’s First Nations name meant: many aquatic birds. Indeed, I saw birds everywhere: in my dreams, above my head, through the windows. I saw the wind, too, moving across the cornfields. The region also brought me back to my love of New England. When choosing the town I was to stay in, I’d randomly pointed at a little village called Mystic. It was an enticing name. I’d also found a sister city in the United States with the same name, which had a museum with a room dedicated to Herman Melville. When I write, I always let myself be led by coincidence. I quickly started inventing connections between Melville and the Québécois Mystic between me scribbling notes in a rented Cavalier and the trailblazers of real and fictional territory that were the great American writers of the 19th century. I also imagined stories of the devil whirling around in the town’s   barn, and created my own private numerology. I would look for covered bridges on the road, round barns built by utopian Quakers and Victorian houses. I thought about loyalists fleeing north after the Revolutionary War, about Irish Catholics fleeing famine, about all the immigrants who left their mark along the path. I knew that by venturing further, to the shores of the great Lake Memphremagog, I would also think about the Vietnam War deserters who’d found refuge there. I thought about the First Nation Abenakis, how they named the lakes and rivers, and about our ignorance. I began my stay at Pike River, but I understood that this road was one where each stop would lead to another. I walked into the office of tourism in Stanbridge Station, my next stop, and asked a petite historian a thousand questions. She showed me Chemin St.  on the map, which she called the second prettiest road in Quebec. (I never learned where the first was.) I didn’t stay in Mystic. As soon as I caught sight of the old cemetery in Hunter Mills, I became fascinated by the border zone between Quebec and the United States. It represented the state I was in myself: a wandering state of mind, looking for ghosts, mine and others’ looking for my words, my promised land, my house built stone by stone throughout my life. And that is how, having been asked to stay in a small village, I found myself gathering the rosary beads of hamlets strung along the border area. I’m still enamored with the scenery I found there: isolated villages in the shadow of the mountains, whose grandeur lorded over long lakes and rivers farms and cornfields a Mercedes up on four blocks amid the junk strewn in front of an abandoned house old   cemeteries that pop up at every turn leafy trees of maple, walnut, beech, oak, birch a few wayside crosses old churches and train stations and checkpoints and in the morning, at the inn by the river, a little black cat sitting on a tree branch listening to the sound of the falls and the purring coffeepot. Élise Turcotte, a poet and novelist, is the author of “The Sound of Living Things” and “Guyana. ” Translated by Allison M. Charette. En français: Il y a quelques années, on m’a demandé de séjourner dans un petit village de mon choix afin d’y écrire des poèmes. J’ai choisi la vallée de la Missisquoi dans les cantons de l’est en Québec, parce que j’aimais la signification du nom donné par les Premières Nations à la baie: beaucoup d’oiseaux aquatiques. Déjà, je voyais des oiseaux partout, dans mes rêves, autour de ma tête, derrière les fenêtres. Je voyais aussi le vent bouger à travers les champs de maïs. Cette région me ramenait aussi à mon amour de la  . Afin de choisir le village de mon séjour, j’avais pointé mon doigt sur un petit village appelé Mystic. Ce nom m’attirait. J’avais aussi découvert une ville homonyme aux   où il y avait, dans un musée, une salle dédiée à Melville. Je me laisse toujours guider par les coïncidences pour écrire. J’inventais d’ores et déjà des liens entre Melville et le Mystic québécois entre moi prenant des notes dans une Cavalier louée, et ces défricheurs de territoires réels et fictifs que sont les grands écrivains américains du 19e siècle. J’imaginais aussi des histoires de diable tournant en rond dans la Grange à douze côtés, et créais une numérologie intime à moi. Je chercherais les ponts couverts sur la route, les granges rondes construites par des quakers utopiques, les maisons à façade victorienne je pensais à la fuite des loyalistes vers le nord, aux Irlandais catholiques fuyant la famine, à tous ces immigrants ayant laissé leurs traces sur le chemin. Je savais qu’en m’aventurant plus loin, aux abords du grand lac Memphrémagog, je penserais aussi aux déserteurs de la guerre du Vietnam. Je pensais aux Abénaquis des Premières Nations, qui ont donné les noms aux lacs et aux rivières, à notre ignorance. À   là où mon séjour commençait, j’ai compris cependant que j’étais sur une route où chaque arrêt menait à un autre. Je suis entrée dans le bureau du tourisme, j’ai posé mille questions à une petite historienne de Stanbridge Station. Elle m’a indiqué sur la carte où se trouve Chemin   la deuxième plus belle route du Québec. (Je n’ai pas jamais appris où se situe la première). Et je ne suis pas restée à Mystic: dès que j’ai aperçu le vieux cimetière de Hunter Mills, c’est la zone frontalière entre le Québec et les   qui m’a fascinée. Elle était l’illustration de l’état dans lequel je me trouvais, dans l’esprit de l’errance, à la recherche de fantômes, les miens, ceux des autres à la recherche de mes mots, ma terre promise, ma maison construite pierre après pierre tout au long de ma vie. Et c’est ainsi qu’appelée à séjourner dans un petit village, je me suis retrouvée à ramasser les grains d’un chapelet de hameaux dispersés sur le chemin de la frontière. Le décor que j’y ai trouvé m’enchante toujours: villages enclavés dans l’ombre des montagnes, dont le grandeur veillaient sur les lacs longs et les rivières fermes et champs de maïs une Mercedes sur quatre blocs à travers le débarras devant une maison à l’abandon de vieux cimetières   qui surprennent à chaque détour des arbres feuillus, érables, noyers, êtres, chênes, bouleaux quelques croix de chemin d’anciennes gares et églises, de vieux postes de frontière et le matin, à l’auberge, un petit chat noir perché sur une branche d’arbre écoutant le bruit des chutes et de la cafetière qui ronronne.

1 - A   of   lead exploded from the barrel of a   pistol at 1, 300 feet per second. The bullet sped toward    Carlos Vasquez, who ran just steps ahead of the gunman. But it missed its mark, just outside the Melrose Houses in the South Bronx, and kept whistling through the air. It sailed for 150 yards along East 154th Street, down the slope between Courtlandt and Elton Avenues, staying airborne as the ground fell away. Maribel Cavero, 45, was crossing the street at the base of that hill, unaware that a shot had been fired during a running fight between young men in the housing project. She had just delivered a carton of sugar substitute to her diabetic grandmother on East 154th Street and was on her way to pick up her    niece from school. The bullet slowed and tumbled as it dropped. Then, with the last of its fading energy, it tore into Ms. Cavero. Alejandro Almonte, 45, a   heard Ms. Cavero yelp and saw her fall. He later said he thought she must have had a seizure. He ran to where she lay, facedown, on the blacktop by a small car’s bumper. She was dying, the bullet having pierced her heart at about 12:50 p. m. on Nov. 2, a sunny Wednesday. The slug passed through her chest and rolled to a stop under a Jeep parked near a   house at 426 East 154th Street. The bullet was strangely pristine, hardly deformed by its deadly work. As investigators began to piece together how the woman had been shot, Sgt. Michael J. LoPuzzo, the commander of the 40th Precinct detective squad, looked uphill, where the bullet had been fired, and downhill, where it had come to rest, and surveyed the maze of telephone poles, streetlights, wires, cars and trees in between. The bullet had improbably traveled nearly two city blocks to strike an unintended victim and log the precinct’s 14th  —   and final  —   homicide of 2016. “It couldn’t have hit a tree?” he said, shaking his head. “A light pole? A sign?” It was grim news for detectives in the 40th Precinct, where The New York Times has been examining every homicide logged in 2016, a succession of   assassinations, gang killings, domestic murders and random slayings. Half the cases remained unsolved, and Sergeant LoPuzzo’s investigators were already struggling to find the person responsible for the fatal shooting of another innocent bystander, Jessica White, cut down on a playground in June. Now, less than a mile away and five months later, the police had another mystery and another blameless bystander lying crumpled on the ground. Detectives were initially unable to explain what had happened. The mayor’s office called the chief of detectives, and the chief of detectives called Sergeant LoPuzzo. The message was simple: Do all you can. The department flooded the streets with rookies who picked through trash and shined flashlights in alleyways and sewer grates searching for any potential evidence. Detectives checked Ms. Cavero’s background for clues. The head of Bronx detectives, Deputy Chief Jason Wilcox, stalked the streets between the projects and the businesses on Third Avenue, the area around him abuzz with the police. It was a striking show of force, and a marked escalation from the police response after Ms. White was killed as she tried to shield her children from gunfire. As the afternoon hours wore on, Sergeant LoPuzzo and his detectives started getting breaks. Things lined up in ways they seldom do in this part of the Bronx, where witnesses rarely agree to testify and investigative staffing is one of the lowest in the city despite a   rate that is the highest. By late the next night, Orlando Oquendo, a    who the police believed had fired the bullet, was in handcuffs, having been identified in a lineup by Mr. Vasquez, the man who said he was the target. Mr. Oquendo, who still looked very much a teenager, had been arrested several times, including twice on gun possession charges, according to court documents and his mother. “That kid was on a road,” Sergeant LoPuzzo said. “It was just a matter of time. ” Less than 48 hours elapsed from death to arrest, and what detectives in this corner of the city say they hope for but rarely see came to pass: The police and the people in the community had cooperated to solve a killing. “It’s supposed to read like a book,” Sergeant LoPuzzo said weeks later, explaining how he wished all cases went that way. “Where you can read all the steps in the investigation, and what they saw and what they found and what the video shows and what the evidence shows. So it’s all one big package. ” It was a luxury, the sergeant said, his squad often did not have. The day she died, Maribel Cavero and her    mother, Maria Reyes, had cooked crabs for an early lunch, using a recipe from their native Ecuador. Together, with Ms. Cavero’s younger sister, Alexandra Cavero, 44, they sat at a small table in the family’s   apartment in the Melrose Houses, only a block from the corner where the shot would be fired. Ms. Cavero regaled them with family gossip and news from their home country. The sisters had joined their mother in the United States in 2008, about 12 years after she followed her own mother from Guayaquil, Ecuador, to the South Bronx in hopes of more earnings and a better life. When lunch was finished, Ms. Cavero’s mother reminded her to drop off the box of sugar substitute to her grandmother, Marcela Troncoso, the    family matriarch, who lived in an apartment on East 154th Street. As she did most days, Ms. Cavero was headed to pick up her sister’s    daughter, Gabriela Encalada, from school, because her sister had to leave for her job as a bus driver. But Ms. Cavero would make time for the delivery. “She said, ‘I’m in a hurry, but I’ll do it,’” Ms. Reyes said in a recent interview. “‘I’ll do it. ’” Ms. Cavero had no husband, no boyfriend and no children, her relatives said. She enjoyed certain solitary pursuits, like romance novels and the online game FarmVille. And aside from family, her regular social activity was Mass at Immaculate Conception Church on East 150th Street. “She lived in her own world,” her sister said. “She was still very naïve. ” With what relatives called a tranquil focus, she poured her energy into caring for her mother and helping to raise her niece, whom she considered like a daughter. She loved tragic poetry, her sister said, and the writings of Pablo Neruda and the novels of Corín Tellado, a prolific romance writer. At night, she would watch Elvis Presley movies, referring to the singer as her eternal love. She watched James Bond movies, too, but told friends she avoided real romantic entanglements because in her view they always brought pain. “In high school, they used to say she seemed like she was in love because when she was into a book, into a piece of literature, she expressed it, and the others would tell her, ‘You’re in love,’ and her answer would be ‘Yes, I’m in love with life,’” her sister said. “‘In some ways you seem like a little girl, and in some ways you’re like an old lady,’ I used to tell her. ” Ms. Cavero worked for a few years as a   nanny, her mother said. But as the children she watched grew, the $   job ended and she wound up working another job her stepfather found for her at a McDonald’s on Sixth Avenue and 28th Street in Manhattan. The shifts began late in the day, which gave her time to pick up Gabriela. But they often ended near midnight. Coming home that late, she usually called her mother to tell her she was leaving work. Her mother said Ms. Cavero was afraid of the neighborhood. “This is a bad place here,” Ms. Reyes said. “Sometimes gunfights are heard outside. ” When the McDonald’s was being remodeled in the fall, Ms. Cavero seized the opportunity to go to Ecuador. She stayed for 45 days with her father, Luis Cavero. She wasn’t thrilled to return to New York, where she had been frustrated in finding meaningful work, and she talked of moving home once her niece was older, her sister said. “Why did this happen?” her sister asked. “I don’t understand. She was a person who had no vices. ” For the investigation into Ms. Cavero’s killing, finding the small, smooth slug under a Jeep near the body was the case’s first big break. Detectives who found it cordoned off the area with crime scene tape. One hunched down, unloaded the magazine of his own   pistol and pulled out a bullet to compare. The slugs were the same size. Another bystander told officers he had seen a man running wildly with something black in his hand through the Melrose playground a block and a half away. Detectives traced a ballistic path westward along East 154th Street and found a plumber who told them he had seen the shooting as he walked with his lunch from the Twin Deli Grocery at East 154th and Courtlandt. The plumber told detectives he saw one young man chase another, then stop and raise his arm. He heard a gunshot and the tinkle of a brass shell hitting the sidewalk as the gunman turned back and sprinted into the Melrose Houses. The shell was there, under some scaffolding, on the northeast corner, and detectives placed a white foam cup over it to preserve it as evidence. After detectives went looking for surveillance video, they found footage from at least five nearby stores and buildings, a bonanza in a neighborhood where security cameras are scarce and often out of order. One video showed a teenager racking a gun, dropping something, then firing. On the street, besides the shell casing, detectives discovered an object they believed had also fallen from the gunman’s hands: a silver cigarette lighter. Television satellite trucks began showing up, a rare but welcome sight for investigators in this part of the city, who hoped publicity might encourage witnesses to come forward. The evening news broadcasts were soon underway, and in a place where even horrific killings often draw only brief coverage, the local stations were going big with the news of an innocent bystander shot dead. For Sergeant LoPuzzo, a steady diet of coffee and cigarettes does nothing to blunt his frustration over witnesses who will not speak. In case after case, as recently as a shooting on New Year’s Day, even seriously injured victims tell a similar story: “Felt pain, saw nothing. ” But the Cavero case was already going differently, and then a call came from the 40th Precinct station house on Alexander Avenue. Detectives told the sergeant, who was still at the scene, that a man had walked into the   squad room claiming to have been in the gunman’s cross hairs. “I said, ‘Do not let him leave,’” Sergeant LoPuzzo recalled. Within minutes, the man, Carlos Vasquez, was putting his account in writing in front of a detective. In his statement, he said he saw the news of Ms. Cavero’s death on television and realized “that a woman was shot and killed by the bullet that was intended for me. ” “I informed my family that I was going to the precinct so I can tell the detectives what happened and tell them I wanted this guy brought to justice,” he said in his statement, which both he and a detective signed. “It’s one of the rare things where he’s got a conscience,” Sergeant LoPuzzo later said. Mr. Vasquez had been arrested more than a dozen times and had been convicted of drug dealing and illegal possession of a knife. He was a   if   drug dealer. He sold in the Melrose Houses near the corner of East 153rd Street and Courtlandt Avenue, where his mother lived, according to court records and the police. In implicating Mr. Oquendo, Mr. Vasquez never explained how the fight had started. In his own words, he said he had left his building on Nov. 2 “in search of marijuana” and was waiting for a dealer near a flagpole at the neighboring Jackson Houses when two men assaulted him. He ran. But before he could make it to the safety of his mother’s house, one of the assailants closed the gap, with a gun in hand. “As I’m running, I turn around to see him point a gun at me and fire it,” Mr. Vasquez said in his statement, though he did not know Mr. Oquendo’s name. “I ducked between cars. ” Even before Mr. Vasquez came in, detectives reviewing the recovered video images from the deli’s cameras thought they had identified a suspect. Officers assigned to a plainclothes   unit recognized the person in the surveillance footage as Mr. Oquendo, the teenager with a lengthy arrest record who was known to officers as “Gumby. ” The case detective, Ivan Monge, also knew the gunman when he saw the video. He had arrested Mr. Oquendo’s older sister on assault charges in October. “I told myself, ‘Wait, this is Gumby, this is Oquendo,’” he said. Detectives did not recover the gun. But with the videos, the witnesses, the bullet, the shell casing and the name of the suspect lining up, Sergeant LoPuzzo’s team made one more breakthrough: Detective David Rodriguez remembered that the suspect’s mother was an old neighbor of his from Spanish Harlem. They had grown up together, their families had attended the same church and they had spoken after one of Mr. Oquendo’s previous arrests. The detective contacted the mother’s relatives on Facebook and eventually got her on the phone. He told her he needed her to bring in her son safely. “Like a mother, she didn’t believe it,” Detective Rodriguez said. “And she wanted the proof. ” Detective Rodriguez went to her home and took her to the squad room, where he showed her a wanted flier with an image of her son taken from the videos. She came in only “because she trusted him,” said Detective John Caruso, another detective working on the case. Finally she broke down. “Yeah,” she said, according to Detective Rodriguez, “that’s my son. ” By the next night, the detectives were packed in the lobby of the Legal Aid Society’s office on East 161st Street in the Bronx. Steven Mechanic, a veteran public defender who had represented Mr. Oquendo against several criminal charges in the past, surrendered him to the police. “There are no winners in this case,” Mr. Mechanic said later, declining to discuss the new charges or Mr. Oquendo’s previous convictions. Mr. Oquendo was led away. His parents cried. “He told me he came over from Cuba on a boat, 20 years ago,” Detective Rodriguez said of the suspect’s father. “I know the mother’s side of the family personally. I’ve known them for years. He comes from a good family, but everyone takes their own path in life. ” Orlando Oquendo’s mother sat in her living room in the Jackson Houses one recent night, with a stack of letters written by her son in jail piled on her lap. She nodded toward the streets outside her   window and spoke of her son’s sorrow for Ms. Cavero’s death. “If he did do it, it was not intentional. It was not toward her,” she said of the shooting. “A person was lost, so it’s going to hurt. ” She felt a kinship for Ms. Cavero’s family. Both were Latino families, she said, one from Puerto Rico and Cuba, the other from Ecuador. Both were churchgoing, and both were living in a   area they wanted to escape. Mr. Oquendo’s mother said that taking the apartment in the Jackson Houses 11 years ago was the worst decision she had ever made. Mr. Oquendo, the fourth of her six children, was troubled and, from a young age, attended a special school for emotionally disturbed children. It was hard to stay neutral in the project’s   gang feuds, and he got into fights constantly. He seemed unable to back down from a threat. He would not “stay shut” when challenged, said his mother, who spoke on the condition that her name not be published. “He had good hands. He could defend himself. ” Twice, her son was accused of crimes involving guns, according to court documents and law enforcement officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss confidential records. In February 2014, a young woman told the police that Mr. Oquendo, who was 15, fired several shots at her, one official said. He was indicted on a gun possession charge in that case, which was transferred to family court and sealed. Then, in August 2015, he was arrested when a police officer saw him drop a .  revolver wrapped in a   on Courtlandt Avenue near East 157th Street, a criminal complaint said. He later pleaded guilty to a reduced charge and was given a conditional discharge, the official said. Mr. Oquendo’s mother said he was supposed to be graduating from high school this month and then going to work for his father’s plumbing business. Her son had been coaching young basketball players at the local Classic Community Center, on the courts where Chris McCullough of the Brooklyn Nets once reigned. He had proposed to his longtime girlfriend, telling her they could someday move to a safer neighborhood with their son, O. J. born on Aug. 16. “If this kid could relive this day, I’m sure he wouldn’t do the same thing that he did,” Sergeant LoPuzzo said. “But once you pull that trigger, you can’t pull that back. ” Still, the pressures were mounting, said Mr. Oquendo’s mother, who referred to him as her “prayer baby” for his constant comfort of her. He watched her battle diabetes and heart disease and saw his maternal grandmother dying of colon cancer. The streets enveloped him, she said. In October, he had a dispute with Mr. Vasquez outside a local barbershop. On the day of the shooting, Mr. Vasquez’s nephew, a friend of the Oquendo family, sent messages to Mr. Oquendo’s sister to find out what had happened. After speaking with Detective Rodriguez, Mr. Oquendo’s mother reached her son and asked him to surrender. “I told him, ‘The best thing to do is to turn yourself in, and let’s see what happens,’” she said. “I don’t want my son out on the run. ” Now, he is in a Rikers Island jail cell, facing a   indictment on murder and other charges. He turned 18 there and spent Thanksgiving and Christmas alone. But his letters and cards keep coming, almost daily, filled with apologies for letting his mother down and promising to come home. In a letter on Dec. 30, he told her not to worry, writing, “God has a plan,” and “Let’s hope God gives us a short, easy punishment. ” Ms. Cavero’s relatives, who are tracking the suspect’s court appearances, are afraid of just that: a light sentence. Detectives said that Mr. Oquendo’s intended victim, Mr. Vasquez, picked him out of a police lineup, but that the plumber who witnessed the shooting had been too afraid to try the same. DNA tests on the silver lighter recovered near the shell casing were inconclusive. In her living room, two blocks from the Oquendo family, Ms. Cavero’s mother, Ms. Reyes, also sat on a couch with a pile of envelopes, these containing court papers and other official documents. She thought back to the moment the police informed her of her daughter’s killing. Detective Monge, the case detective, had knocked on her door to deliver the news in Spanish, and she was grateful for his compassion. But even after a wake, in which her daughter was dressed all in white, and a funeral, in Ecuador, she said the randomness of the death  —   in which a person with no enemies or vices was taken violently  —   remained the abiding mystery. It is a question the police cannot answer. “That is what I ask myself,” Ms. Reyes said, tears falling down her cheeks. “Why did this happen this way?”



########################################################################################################################

2 - Updated: 11:50 p. m. The New York Times is driving to Friday’s inauguration with supporters of   Donald J. Trump. On Wednesday, we traveled with a woman from Massachusetts, the bluest state east of the Mississippi. On Thursday, we joined a man from West Virginia, the reddest state in the East. Dianna Ploss, 53, is a volunteer organizer for Mr. Trump, a turn of fate that surprised even her  —   a longtime Democrat who until recently was uninterested in politics. I am a national correspondent for The Times, originally from Granville, Mass. and I rode with a photographer in the back seat of a Dodge pickup driven by Dianna’s friend Scott Hayes, a landscaper. There was a cardboard cutout of Mr. Trump, too. Along the way, we talked about life, Mr. Trump and the future of America. We stopped at a McDonald’s, Cracker Barrel, Applebee’s and multiple rest areas. We listened to Abba, the Supremes, Fleetwood Mac, Cheryl Lynn and Obama. I got carsick. And   hours later, we made it to Washington. SABRINA TAVERNISE _____ GLOUCESTER, Mass. 10:27 a. m.: I just wrapped up a Facebook Live video introduction to Dianna and Scott, and we’re about to leave for the drive. For her part, Dianna spent the past year working tirelessly for Mr. Trump’s campaign, spending her own money and countless hours to get him elected. She was even a delegate at the Republican convention. She also lived for years in Cambridge, where Hillary Clinton won 88 percent of the vote. (Mr. Trump got 6 percent.) She has a rare ability to move back and forth between the two worlds. She has a lot to say about both. She had never really been that interested in politics. She grew up in Boston in the 1970s. Her dad worked as a school bus driver. Her mom raised four children and tended bar. “We were all Democrats back then,” she says. “Forty years later, we are all Republicans. ” Miles driven: 0. Miles to go: 470. _____ NEAR WORCESTER, Mass. 11:59 a. m.: It has started to snow. The truck’s windows are steaming up. Dianna is talking to people on the phone, trying to help them find a place to stay in Washington. The Airbnb she will be staying in there is filling up fast. Her phone is pinging with people talking to her on Facebook. It’s like a giant extended family all chattering at once. Her journey to this point has been quite a trip of its own. Dianna’s adult life happened suddenly and soon. She got pregnant as a freshman in high school  —   a Catholic school. She was afraid. She says she got through it by putting each part of her life in a different room and closing the door. At graduation, she was the student council president. She thought she should go to college, but now she had a daughter. She had an underachiever boyfriend. She had no money. And her family did not understand what college would get her. It took her 10 years to finish community college. She worked in a bank, painting houses, as a secretary in an   shop. In her   she decided to go to nursing school. She worked in cardiac surgery, in psychiatry, in urgent care. She did well, but she didn’t like it. What she really liked was volunteering. And organizing. She knew nothing about running, but became the director of a private track club, managing 25 coaches and 200 kids ages 8 to 14, and raising the money to support it. When she had the kids sell a coupon book with discounts from local businesses, it was the     the club had ever run. Miles driven: 71. Miles to go: 399. _____ CHARLTON, Mass. 12:26 p. m.: I am carsick. Scott spots a rest area and pulls in. Dianna buys me a Coke and even finds me generic   medicine in a store. “Here you go, honey,” she says kindly. “Sit down. You don’t look so good. ” I’m drinking a full sugar Coke, and my stomach is already starting to feel better. Miles driven: 83. Miles to go: 387. _____ STURBRIDGE, Mass. 12:47 p. m.: “Oh my God! You got to put this one in!” Dianna says, looking through a stack of CDs. “The Partridge Family?! Are you nuts?” says Scott. “I have Abba,” she says. “Neil Diamond. Chicago. Bee Gees. But I love the Partridge Family. ” Scott: “Oh boy. ” The music begins to play. “I woke up in love this morning. Went to sleep with you on my mind. ” “It’s a very complicated song,” she says, laughing. Miles driven: 92. Miles to go: 378. _____ NEAR HARTFORD, 1:07 p. m.: Dianna reads through some of the comments on the Facebook Live segment: Lots of angry shouting about Trump. Some of it about us. I ask Dianna how she feels. “Uncomfortable,” she says. As much as she is part of the Trump team, she tries to avoid alienating people. Maybe that comes from having lived in Cambridge. Maybe that comes from her personality as a networker. “I try to encourage people not to yell,” she says. “I had a little meeting with women who are part of the volunteer team. I said, ‘If our goal is getting people to go toward Trump, criticizing them isn’t the right way. It makes you look bad, too.’ ” “I don’t attack people personally,” she adds. “Except if I’m by myself and the TV is on. ” She pops an Abba album into the truck’s CD player. Miles driven: 126. Miles to go: 344. _____ WETHERSFIELD, Conn. 1:30 p. m.: I ask Dianna how someone who grew up a Democrat in Massachusetts could have wound up a Trump voter. Her move toward politics, she explains, was less a burning ideological expression and more an affinity for people, and for bringing them together. She was good at leading people, but the world was also changing. In 2015, she sold her house in Cambridge and quit nursing to focus on an invention that involves beverages. “I was living in my camper in Framingham in my friend’s yard,” she says. “They were liberal. Stuff was happening  —   San Bernardino, Paris. I’d think: I don’t know if I agree with them. ” When Mr. Trump announced his candidacy in 2015, she felt no sudden spark, she says. But his message steadily seeped in, like a   realization about herself and her beliefs: one she had always had, but had never really considered. “People were lying down everywhere,” she says, recalling protests about police violence. “They were lying down in Harvard Square. They were lying down on Route 93. They blocked traffic for three hours.   is a really congested road you want to pull your hair out anyway. To shut it down? What the hell is going on? What are these people doing?” At some point, she registered as a Republican. “I was trying to find out who I am in this whole crazy mess,” she says. “I feel like I had to take a stand. It was just crazy. I couldn’t understand it. ” Miles driven: 135. Miles to go: 335. _____ BERLIN, Conn. 1:37 p. m.: It has stopped raining. I ask Dianna how she came to like Mr. Trump. She says she did not take his candidacy seriously at first. “All I knew about him was that reality show,” she says. But when she tuned in, she realized he appealed to her. “I really liked Trump’s   thing. I grew up, I went to Catholic school. We did the Pledge of Allegiance every day. That was important. ” “I started to pay attention not to what he was saying, but to the effect that he had. The freedom of speech things. He said outrageous things but so what. People would get so worked up over outrageous things. ” “He was the tough guy. I like that he stood up for himself. He didn’t take any garbage from people. He retaught people how to have their  . He showed that you can stand up for yourself. ” Miles driven: 142. Miles to go: 328. _____ NORWALK, Conn. 2:53 p. m.: “Oh, they were not happy in there,” Dianna announces, emerging from a McDonald’s with Scott, the Trump cutout and a small bag of French fries. (I had been in the bathroom and missed the action.) “The guy behind the counter said, ‘We don’t do politics,’” Dianna reports. “I told him we just needed some fries. ” A woman in a puffy blue jacket sitting at the window bangs on the glass with her fist. Having caught our attention, she points her finger at the cardboard Trump and gives a deep   motion. We are standing in the parking lot, and two women walk briskly up to Dianna. “I love Mr. Trump, trust me,” says Lillia Millard, a retired translator who was born in Russia and now lives in West Norwalk. “He says it like it is, just like me. ” Dianna asks if she is going to watch the inauguration. “Yes!” she says enthusiastically. Her daughter, a journalist, will not. “She’s going to the women’s march, unfortunately,” Ms. Millard says, adding, “I still have until Saturday to talk her out of it. ” Scott gives her a   bumper sticker, and we pull back out onto the highway to the music of Grand Funk Railroad. Miles driven: 202. Miles to go: 268. _____ DARIEN, Conn. 3:26 p. m.: We are stopping again. The rest stop is all beige plastic and fake wood. A television is playing President Obama’s last news conference. It is barely audible under a thumping Stevie Nicks song. It is in the final minutes. “There are a lot more good people than bad in this country,” he says. Dianna says back: “Yeah. I agree with that. I do. ” He says that he curses more behind closed doors. “So do I,” Dianna says. He is talking about his daughters. He keeps going. He says he believes in this country. Dianna stops agreeing. “Do you believe he believes in this country?” I ask her. “No,” she replies. “I don’t believe that. ” I ask her why. “For all these years, people said all this stuff about him and I didn’t believe them,” she said. “But he has done so much to harm America. He basically tried to be Robin Hood. His trade policies. His willingness to try to take away from people who had more and give to those who had less. ” “The middle class shrunk, more people ended up at the bottom. That was as the result of him. Obamacare was a big part of this. Look how much money it costs me just for my health care. It didn’t make sense to me. It’s hard to know. Is it really what’s in his heart, or are his ideals getting in his way?” Miles driven: 207. Miles to go: 263. _____ Still in DARIEN, Conn. 4:33 p. m.: We’re eating spicy hummus and carrots at the Darien, Conn. rest stop. I am asking Dianna about Mr. Obama. She didn’t vote for him. But she defended him when her family or friends would attack him. Now, she is glad to see him go. Part of that is because of policing. “The first thing he said that struck me was when he said the Cambridge police acted stupidly,” she said, referring to Mr. Obama’s remark about the arrest of Henry Louis Gates Jr. a black Harvard professor, in 2009 as Mr. Gates tried to enter his own home. “When that comment came out, something in my head went, ‘Huh? ’” “Then he said, ‘Trayvon Martin could have been my son.’ Maybe that’s what he’s thinking, but when he says something like that as a leader, people listen. I had this like, ‘What?’ I was confused by that. What are you doing?” She added: “Things have changed in terms of the criminality. People will do anything. They are going up to cops and executing them. People are blowing themselves up. They are ramming trucks into things. If you alienate the police, then we are going to have no law and order. ” On Mr. Obama, she said: “When you are the leader, there are times when you have to bite your tongue. ” She added: “I feel the irony in that, because people will say Donald Trump doesn’t bite his tongue. I want to see how it plays out once he’s president. I don’t know the answer. ” Miles driven: 207. Miles to go: 263. _____ FORT LEE, N. J. 6 p. m.: We are back on   closer now to the end of our trip than to the beginning. The Supremes are playing our driver, Scott, is grateful that we are no longer listening to Abba. We have just crossed over the George Washington Bridge. I’m asking Dianna and Scott about immigration. For Scott, economics undergirds his thinking. Two friends used to give him a lot of landscaping work 10 or 15 years ago, but have since stopped they have Latin American employees now. Another client, who recently sold a company for millions, said he wanted to cut Scott’s rate to $20 an hour from $30 and asked him if he could learn Spanish to manage a work crew. “Fundamentally, it’s not fair,” he says. “I’m working seven days a week now so I can carry myself through the winter. They say Republicans want the cheaper labor and Democrats want the votes. But I think they both want cheaper labor. People with money just want cheaper labor. ” He says he does not blame the laborers, but is angry with politicians who talk as if it were not a problem. “If I was a poor person south of the border, I’d probably do the same thing,” he says. Scott, 58, who lives in Beverly, Mass. has led rafting trips in Texas on the Rio Grande for years. In 2010, he says, he was at the end of a rafting trip when he saw five people trying to cross the river. They appeared to be asking him to help them across. He kept going. Several months later, Janet Napolitano  —   then the secretary of homeland security  —   was nearby, in Laredo, Tex. and said the border had never been more secure. Scott says he did not believe her. “You lose your language, border and your culture, you’re going to lose your country,” he says, sounding one of the  ’s campaign themes. “Your country is done. ” Miles driven: 240. Miles to go: 230. _____ EAST WINDSOR, N. J. 6:57 p. m.: The car is silent. Dianna: “Do you like lobster?” Scott: “I like it, but it’s expensive. ” Dianna: “I just don’t like fighting with my food. ” Scott: “The only thing that’s really good is the tail. ” Dianna: “The only thing that’s really good is the butter. Anything tastes good dipped in butter. ” Miles driven: 296. Miles to go: 174. _____ MOUNT HOLLY, N. J. 7:38 p. m.  We pulled into a Cracker Barrel for dinner. Dianna had never been inside one. “O. K. there’s country music in the bathroom,” she said. “It smells nice  —   like candles or something. ” She surveys the store. She looks at a wall full of coffee mugs with names on them: Grandpa. Papa. Mom. “Look at all these cups. It’s spewing happiness. It’s like a quaint little town or something. ” We left because there was no table with an outlet near it for Dianna or me. Miles driven: 318. Miles to go: 152. _____ WESTAMPTON, N. J. 8:11 p. m.: We are waiting for dinner in an Applebee’s. I ask Dianna and Scott what they expect from Mr. Trump and if they are afraid he might disappoint them. “If he doesn’t deliver on the economy, I’ll be disappointed,” Scott says. “He says he’s going to change the tax rate for the middle class. That’s huge for me. I bought a house five years ago and the taxes have gone up $200 every single year. ” Scott doesn’t trusts the elites  —   entrenched politicians with money. “I don’t trust McCain, I don’t trust Rubio, I don’t trust Paul Ryan,” he says. “I love Trump for calling out the elites and the ruling class for who they are. Because they have forgotten about the working man and working woman. ” He is also suspicious of the term “comprehensive immigration reform. ” Dianna says: “Anytime a politician uses the word comprehensive, it makes you think they are lying. It’s just an empty word. Smoke and mirrors. They throw big words around, make it look like they are actually doing something. Makes people feel like, almost like they are not smart enough to understand what they are doing. ” She added, “I think Trump will deliver. ” Our dinner comes. Two shrimp salads and a burger. Miles driven: 319. Miles to go: 151. _____ NEW CASTLE, Del. 9:51 p. m.: We are getting sleepy. Another toll, this one for the Delaware Memorial Bridge. Scott thinks the sign says $400. “What! ?” Dianna says in mock shock. “Got to pay for that wall somehow. ” Everybody laughs. We pull up to the cash lane. An older woman in a wool hat, glasses and a yellow security vest hands us change. Holding up the Trump cardboard cutout, Dianna asks: “Do you know who this is?” The woman responds in a deadpan voice: “I’ve never seen him in my life. ” But when she is asked if she likes him, a smile creeps onto her face. “Thumbs up,” she says. Miles driven: 366. Miles to go: 104. _____ NEWARK, Del. 10:03 p. m.: It’s dark. Dinner’s over. Disco is playing: Cheryl Lynn’s “Got To Be Real. ” Dianna is driving to give Scott a rest. Cardboard Trump is still smirking in the back seat. “I’m getting out my bell bottoms,” says Scott drily. I sing for a while. Dianna does too. Then I ask about health care. “I spent probably $20, 000 on health care last year,” Dianna says. She was paying about $850 a month through a private plan she bought herself. But her deductible for    care jumped to $4, 500 from $3, 000.   she says, jumped to $3, 000 from $2, 000. Dianna, who has been living off the proceeds from the sale of her house in Cambridge, says she could have gotten insured through Obamacare last year, because she was not working. But she chose not to. “I said, Dianna, how can you go on food stamps and get free health care if you are volunteering for Trump? I thought it would be the wrong thing to do. ” But now she has Obamacare. She is helping to support her father, she explains, and her budget has gotten tight. “I don’t feel good that I had to do that,” she says. “I have more control over my life when I have better health insurance. It’s also about pride. ” Miles driven: 381. Miles to go: 89. _____ BALTIMORE, 10:50 p. m.: Hurtling through Maryland. Fleetwood Mac’s greatest hits playing, “Rhiannon” among them. Whatever happens with Mr. Trump, Scott Hayes has already won something important: a deep network of people who think like him. He has a flip phone. He is not on Facebook. But he believes he will hold on to those new connections. They have revived him. Made him feel more alive. “I always felt so alone, like nobody wanted to hear what I was saying,” he says. “So I’d go to these rallies just to see if there were other people who thought like I did. Now I’m meeting all kinds of people. It’s been awesome. ” Dianna wants to keep up the momentum with all the people she has met, too. Like the woman named May who owns a Chinese restaurant in Newton, Mass. and who went up to New Hampshire on Tuesdays with some of her staff to volunteer. Dianna organized a Christmas party for Trump supporters in Massachusetts in December. There was Champagne on every table. The cardboard cutout of Trump was there, too. “I’m relieved,” she says. “He won. I think he’s going to deliver. ” Miles driven: 427. Miles to go: 43. _____ WASHINGTON, 11:50 p. m.: We pull into the parking garage at Dianna’s Airbnb in southwest Washington, ride the elevator to the eighth floor, and walk into a spacious   with parquet floors. Scott holds cardboard Trump. There is a view of the Washington Monument. “Wow, it’s huge,” Dianna says, looking out a long glass sliding door. “This is, like, pretty fancy. ” Scott stands the   up. I ask the two of them how it feels to be at the end of this    journey. “It’s the end, but it’s the beginning,” Dianna says. “Now, it’s a new chapter in our lives, for the country, for Mr. Trump. Let’s see what he can do. ” Miles driven: 470. Miles to go: 0.

2 - One way to regard the refugees in the news these frenzied past few days is as potential Americans, individuals and families escaping bad situations who imagine themselves building new lives here. What these particular refugees could become in this country, and how they could contribute to our society and culture, is a question stuck in suspended animation. But we do have the power to look to the past. And in the literary realm it’s unquestionable that refugees, once here, often make major contributions. Through the 20th century and into this one, those fleeing political persecution or war have produced important works that we think of now as at least partly American, from fiction about the harrowing experiences of exile and dislocation to political treatises by thinkers who want to understand why their homelands fell apart. This is a sampling of 25 of those works. Bertolt Brecht, “The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui” (1941) Country of origin: GermanyReason for leaving: Fled Nazi Germany for Denmark in 1933, and then came to the United States in 1941 when war broke out. Brecht always intended his satire about the ruthless ascension of a Chicago mobster to be performed on an American stage. He is mocking Adolf Hitler, each dopey and villainous character having a Nazi counterpart in real life. The character of the populist bully, who has a penchant for both public speaking and private   was central in Brecht’s mind during his wartime exile. Hans Augusto Rey and Margret Rey, “Curious George” (1941) Country of origin: GermanyReason for Leaving: German Jews who escaped from their native Hamburg to Brazil and then France, only to leave again for the United States in 1940 just as the Nazis invaded. The mischievous monkey who had a canny way of getting in and out of trouble originated in the minds of Hans Augusto and Margret Rey. They conceived of the character while themselves trying to outrun the Nazis, finally escaping from France on homemade bicycles and carrying the manuscript with the first mention of George (then called “Zozo”) along with them. Karl Polanyi, “The Great Transformation” (1944) Country of origin: AustriaReason for Leaving: With Hitler’s rise, prominent socialists like Polanyi were imperiled, so he left for England in 1933 and then arrived in Vermont in 1940. After settling down to teach at Bennington College, Polanyi published his major work, which looked at how the Industrial Revolution was so disruptive that it created the conditions for both Communism and fascism. But capitalism, he argued, did not happen spontaneously. It required an enormous amount of government planning in order to function. “  was planned,” was his counterintuitive summation. Thomas Mann, “Doctor Faustus” (1947) Country of origin: GermanyReason for leaving: An opponent of Hitler’s rise, Mann left for Switzerland in 1933 and eventually emigrated to the United States in 1939. Mann, in his California exile, took the Faust legend and placed it in the context of the rise and fall of Nazi Germany. His main character, a composer, strikes a deal with a Mephistophelean figure to give him creative glory. But madness is the   which becomes an allegory for where Germany is headed. Theodor Adorno, “The Authoritarian Personality” (1950) Country of origin: GermanyReasons for leaving: After being dismissed from his teaching position in 1932 by the Nazis, Adorno left to study at Oxford and then moved to the United States in 1938. Adorno wanted to understand what kind of personality type was susceptible to fascism. He found his answer, via Freud, in a harsh parenting style that led to the kind of person who would crave the approval and guidance of an authoritarian. Hannah Arendt, “The Origins of Totalitarianism” (1951) Country of origin: GermanyReasons for leaving: In 1933, Arendt, a German Jew, left her country and eventually settled in Paris, where she helped Jewish refugees. Once the Vichy regime took over, she herself was interned as an “enemy alien,” but managed to emigrate and settle in New York in 1941. Like Adorno and the other German Jewish emigrants of her generation, Arendt was fixated on the question of why democratic institutions collapse and authoritarianism rises. In her major political work, she dissected both Nazism and Stalinism as instantiations of a new type of politics, one that utilized terror and fear to subjugate populations and gain their acquiescence. Leo Strauss, “Natural Right and History” (1953) Country of origin: GermanyReasons for leaving: Already teaching in England when the Nazis came to power, Strauss was prevented from returning and moved to the United States in 1937. In six lectures given from his perch at the University of Chicago, Strauss laid out his argument about what he saw as modernity’s nihilistic rejection of classical philosophy. The immutable truths of Plato and Aristotle needed to be appreciated again. Once we follow the thought of these ancient philosophers we will see more clearly what should distinguish right and wrong in ethics and politics. Vladimir Nabokov, “Lolita” (1955) Country of origin: RussiaReasons for leaving: Born to Russian nobility, Nabokov and his family fled the Bolshevik Revolution, living in a succession of European countries. He eventually moved to America in 1940, where he took up work as an entomologist at the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard, among other jobs. In his most famous and controversial novel, Nabokov took up the story of Humbert Humbert, a man obsessed with a young girl, his nymphet, Lolita. In what is essentially the tale of a sordid road trip, Nabokov has Humbert traveling the country in possession of his illicit love interest. The book is filled with Nabokov’s own observations about an America that still felt foreign and exciting to him. Isabel Allende, “The House of the Spirits” (1982) Country of origin: ChileReasons for leaving: Allende fled to Venezuela in 1973 after the coup that brought down Salvador Allende, the socialist leader and her father’s cousin. She moved to California in the late 1980s. Drawing on the circumstances of her own exile, Allende used her debut novel to tell a multigenerational saga that takes place in an unnamed country very much like Chile. We see the destruction of democracy and the rise of a cruel dictator who tries to eliminate all opposition. “I wanted to show that life goes in a circle, events are intertwined, and that history repeats itself, there is no beginning and no end,” Allende said about her sprawling,   narrative. Czeslaw Milosz, “Bells in Winter” (1985) Country of origin: PolandReason for leaving: After surviving World War II in Poland and initially joining the postwar Communist government, Milosz defected in 1951, eventually emigrating to the United States in 1960. The Polish poet and Nobel Prize winner produced a quietly meditative work in 1985 that pointed toward the mysterious quality of existence, the inability to fully understand our own natures. “Life was impossible, but was endured,” he writes in “Recess,” capturing the exile’s lament, the alienation of deracination, of living an arm’s length away from oneself. Joseph Brodsky, “Less Than One” (1986) Country of origin: Soviet UnionReason for leaving: Put on trial and into psychiatric institutions for his dissident beliefs, Brodsky was expelled from the Soviet Union in 1972. Brodsky was interested in the poet’s role in society, and these essays, which deal with politics, literature and his own personal experience of exile, all get at this question. For him, poetry was “the most democratic art,” as he says in an essay about the West Indian poet Derek Walcott. It’s the poet’s embrace of individuality that makes him a necessary counterpoint  —   an important thorn  —   to the state. Nuruddin Farah, “Maps” (1986) Country of origin: SomaliaReasons for leaving: Exiled from Somalia in the   for writing about life under the harsh rule of the dictator Mohammed Siad Barre. In the first novel of his trilogy, “Blood in the Sun,” Farrah writes about a young man, an orphan, obsessed with his own origins. Growing up dislocated in the big city of Mogadishu and tormented by the need to avenge his father’s death, the boy reflects all the struggles of national identity in a country torn from the traditional past and thrust into a violent future. Ariel Dorfman, “Death and the Maiden” (1990) Country of origin: ChileReasons for leaving: A cultural adviser to the deposed socialist leader Salvador Allende, Dorfman was forced to flee the country in 1973. In his revenge fantasy of a play, Dorfman dramatized the confrontation between a woman who was tortured by a Latin American regime and the   thug who supposedly did the torturing. She puts him on trial through a long night. Is this really the man who tortured her with electricity to the strains of Schubert, or is she making a paranoid mistake? In this confusion lies Dorfman’s own feelings about the evasive quality of redemption. Reinaldo Arenas, “Before Night Falls” (1992) Country of origin: CubaReasons for leaving: Imprisoned for his writing, he was able to emigrate to America as part of the Mariel Boatlift in 1980. Published after his suicide in 1990, Arenas’s memoir tell his whole life story, from his impoverished youth all the way to his decision to kill himself. It’s also a tale of political disillusion and the pain of exile. Arenas was a true believer in Castro, but after being locked up for being gay he begins a process of losing more of himself, until he is left without a homeland. Cristina Garcia, “Dreaming in Cuban” (1992) Country of origin: CubaReasons for leaving: Her family was among the first wave of people to escape from Cuba in 1961 shortly after Fidel Castro took power. Garcia’s first novel looked at three generations of women exiled from Cuba, all with complex feelings about the country, from love and nostalgia to revulsion. For the daughter of a revolutionary, now living in New York, her memories are of being raped by one of Castro’s young followers. “She wants no part of Cuba,” Garcia writes of this young woman, “no part of its wretched carnival floats creaking with lies, no part of Cuba at all. ” Henry Kissinger, “Diplomacy” (1994) Country of origin: GermanyReasons for leaving: A German Jew, he fled with his family in 1938. The former secretary of state tried to sum up in this book his realist foreign policy approach, taking a historical tour from Europe in the 17th century all the way up to his years working for Presidents Nixon and Ford. Realpolitik here is the attempt to achieve stability through a careful balancing of world powers. Scarred by his own experience growing up in Nazi Germany, Kissinger has always been alive to the fragility of democracy, a feeling that has guided his approach, one that abhors idealism. Loung Ung, “First They Killed My Father” (2001) Country of origin: CambodiaReasons for leaving: Escaped from Pol Pot’s Khmer Rouge regime in 1979, ending up in Vermont. Ung’s memoir of life near the edge of the “killing fields” is a harrowing attempt at a collective document. “If you had been living in Cambodia during this period, this would be your story too,” she writes. Her father was killed, and she was starved and near death by the time she managed to enter a Vietnamese refugee camp. It’s a story that is told straightforwardly. When Ung asks her father why the Khmer Rouge are acting so violently, he answers simply, “Because they are destroyers of things. ” Madeleine Albright, “Madam Secretary” (2003) Country of origin: CzechoslovakiaReasons for leaving: Hitler’s takeover of parts of Czechoslovakia forced her family, supporters of the early Czech democrat Edvard Benes, to go into exile and finally emigrate to the United States in 1948. Albright recounts her years as secretary of state during the Clinton presidency and the unlikely path she took as a Czech refugee, whose family fled both Hitler and later Communism. She also grapples with an unexpected twist in her family story. Late in life, Albright discovered that her parents were Jewish. They had converted to Catholicism and never revealed this secret to her, or that her grandparents had perished as Jews in a Nazi concentration camp. Dinaw Mengestu, “The Beautiful Things That Heaven Bears” (2007) Country of origin: EthiopiaReasons for leaving: His family fled Ethiopia’s Communist revolution in 1980, when he was 2, and they found their way to Peoria, Ill. In his first novel, Mengestu captured the world of immigrants and refugees in Washington, D. C. as they gather at a Logan Circle grocery store and reminisce about homes they can’t go back to. “How was I supposed to live in America,” says Sepha Stephanos, the book’s protagonist and the store’s owner, “when I had never really left Ethiopia?” Ishmael Beah, “A Long Way Gone” (2007) Country of origin: Sierra LeoneReasons for leaving: Forced to become a child soldier at the age of 12, Beah eventually escaped Freetown in 1997 with the help of Unicef and ended up in New York City. Beah’s memoir offers a rare chance to see war from the eyes of a child soldier, brainwashed and kept obedient with drugs and guns. But the bleakness of this account is also tempered with the redemption that comes at the end. He gets out. And the very act of reading as he tells the story of his past is indication that a nightmare like this can end. Masha Gessen, “The Man Without a Face” (2012) Country of origin: Soviet UnionReasons for leaving: Gessen’s family was Jewish and denied religious freedom in the Soviet Union (or the right to freely emigrate). In 1981 her family was granted permission to leave. Gessen, a child of the Soviet Union, offers up a portrait of Vladimir Putin as a man formed by his many years in the K. G. B. She finds the roots of his illiberalism, his secrecy, his disregard for democratic norms. It’s an authoritarianism she fears others have been blind to, projecting onto him the leader they hope he will be. Vaddey Ratner, “In the Shadow of the Banyan” (2012) Country of origin: CambodiaReasons for leaving: Ratner and her mother escaped the Khmer Rouge regime in 1979 after enduring four years of forced labor, starvation and near execution. They immigrated to rural Missouri. Ratner’s first novel hews closely to her own traumatic biography. A child of only 5 when Pol Pot’s army began terrorizing the country, she tells the story from that perspective, focusing on both the beauty and the horror as it appears to innocent eyes hardly able to comprehend beyond the everyday sensations of panic and wonder. Gary Shteyngart, “Little Failure” (2014) Country of origin: Soviet UnionReasons for leaving: Like other Soviet Jews, Shteyngart and his family felt discriminated against in the Soviet Union and were allowed to emigrate in 1979. Shteyngart’s mother must have meant it in an endearing way when she called her son “Little Failure. ” He certainly embraced the moniker. Here the hilarious writer turns to memoir to tell his own story of arriving in America as an awkward young boy. Through the trials and tribulations of Hebrew school and the thick pot smoke of Oberlin, Shteyngart survived and has become our chronicler of   absurdity as only an immigrant with a funny name can see it. Viet Thanh Nguyen, “The Sympathizer” (2015) Country of origin: VietnamReasons for leaving: Nguyen’s family escaped Vietnam in 1975 and lived in a Pennsylvania refugee camp before settling in Harrisburg. The great contribution of Nguyen’s Pulitzer   first novel is that it introduces a Vietnamese voice into a conversation that has been  . As the narrator, annoyed that American soldiers and politicians have monopolized the story of the Vietnam War, explains, “this was the first war where the losers would write history instead of the victors. ” This novel, applying fresh eyes to a war now known only through clichés, offers that corrective. Vu Tran, “Dragonfish” (2015) Country of origin: VietnamReasons for leaving: Born in Saigon in 1975, five months after the city fell to the North Vietnamese, Tran left by boat in 1980 with his mother and sister, spending five days at sea. Tran’s novel, his first, does not engage in any nostalgia about the lost home. That place carries only memories of trauma and war. He forces his characters, including a Vietnamese woman in California who mysteriously disappears, to grapple with that past. It’s the only way to get anywhere near embracing their new American realities.

2 - ROSWELL, Ga.  —   It was 1 in the morning, and the orthopedic surgeon on call was preparing to operate on a woman whose foot had been shattered in a car wreck, after hours of tending to other patients. The woman’s husband, Jeff Anderson, asked him, “Are you too tired to do this?” “He looked me straight in the eye  —   very quiet guy  —   and said, ‘I was born to do this,’” Mr. Anderson recalled. The surgeon that night more than 20 years ago was Representative Tom Price of Georgia,   Donald J. Trump’s nominee for secretary of health and human services, the cabinet official who will lead the new administration’s efforts to dismantle the Affordable Care Act. Since then, the assuredness that defined Mr. Price as a surgeon has carried into his political career. He has always listened politely to other viewpoints but never swerved from his policy mission to protect his former profession from what he views as   government intrusion. Many who knew Mr. Price as a doctor here in Atlanta’s affluent northern suburbs praise his commitment to his patients. But his legislative record shows that over eight years in the Georgia Senate and 12 years in Congress, he has advocated at least as much for physician groups and health care companies  —   seeking to limit damages in malpractice cases, for instance, and voting against legislation that would have required the government to negotiate lower drug prices for Medicare beneficiaries. Mr. Price has routinely argued that patients are the driving force behind his efforts. Still, his positions have often coincided with the financial interests of groups whose donations have helped advance his political career. Doctors themselves are sharply divided over his nomination, and some are particularly galled by Mr. Price’s enmity for the Affordable Care Act and opposition to abortion rights. Some of his positions even clash with those of Mr. Trump, who wants to pressure pharmaceutical companies on drug prices, for example, and has pledged to largely leave Medicare alone. If confirmed, Mr. Price, 62, will soon have far more power to influence the nation’s vast health care system than he ever did as a lawmaker. One of his first tasks would be to help Mr. Trump and Republicans in Congress determine how to eviscerate and replace the health law, a goal he has held since the law’s passage in 2010. But as leader of the agency that oversees Medicare, Medicaid, the Food and Drug Administration and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Mr. Price would also hold considerable regulatory power, with the ability to influence everything from how applications to market new drugs are reviewed to how doctors are compensated for treating elderly and poor patients. As Mr. Price prepares for two confirmation hearings  —   the first of which is scheduled for Wednesday  —   his past efforts on behalf of   companies, which have donated generously to his campaigns, are under scrutiny. So, too, is Mr. Price’s history of trading in biomedical, pharmaceutical and health insurance stocks while serving on the health subcommittee of the House Ways and Means Committee. Democrats have called for investigations into whether he traded stock based on information he gleaned as a congressman. Last year, Mr. Price bought stock in a company that makes orthopedic implants shortly before introducing legislation that could have protected the company, Zimmer Biomet, from financial losses due to a new federal regulation. The regulation sought to rein in spending on joint replacements for Medicare patients Mr. Price’s legislation would have delayed its implementation. After he introduced it, Zimmer’s political action committee contributed to his   campaign the string of events was first reported Monday by CNN. Phillip J. Blando, a spokesman for the Trump transition team, said Mr. Price “had no knowledge or input into the purchase” of the Zimmer stock, which he said was made by a broker. Asked why Mr. Price had not directed his broker to avoid buying   stocks while he wrote and voted on health legislation, Mr. Blando said, “We know that other members of Congress, including Democrats, have holdings in health care stocks and vote on   legislation. ” In a letter to an ethics lawyer at the Department of Health and Human Services last week Mr. Price said he would divest himself of holdings in 43   and other stocks to avoid conflicts of interest. Noting that the Office of Government Ethics had completed an “exhaustive review” of Mr. Price’s financial holdings, Mr. Blando said last week that Mr. Price “takes his obligation to uphold the public trust very seriously. ” Although not among the billionaires whom Mr. Trump has tapped for his cabinet, Mr. Price has profited from medicine, both as a doctor and as an active investor in health   companies including Aetna,   Squibb and Zimmer Biomet, which makes artificial joints and other medical devices. He has an estimated net worth of $13. 6 million, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, with assets that include real estate. He has also been an effective  : Even in his first run for office in 1996, his war chest of $173, 000, much of which came from doctors and medical companies, led his poorly financed Democratic opponent to call him “Dr. Dollar. ” A brisk,   workaholic who relishes the granular details of legislative proposals and process, Mr. Price expressed concern last year about Mr. Trump’s grasp of the issues. Taking questions from a student group at Emory University, he said he had voted for Marco Rubio in the Republican primary and called Mr. Trump an “empty policy vessel” who was “dangerous for politics and the economy,” according to the student newspaper. Mr. Price, who declined to be interviewed, was engaged in a number of pitched partisan battles even before coming to Washington in 2005. In the Georgia Legislature, he voted against a new state flag that minimized the Confederate battle cross and supported a constitutional amendment banning   marriage. In Congress, he has taken stances seen as antithetical to public health, opposing regulating tobacco as a drug and favoring legislation that would make it easier to sell bullets that can pierce armor. He has also written a fairly detailed plan for replacing the Affordable Care Act. It would repeal the law’s expansion of Medicaid and provide tax credits to help with the cost of coverage based on age instead of income, with older people getting higher credits. Mr. Price grew up in Dearborn, Mich. the son and grandson of doctors who heavily influenced his career choice. He has publicly recalled making house calls with his grandfather, who practiced medicine into his 90s. After medical school at the University of Michigan, he moved to Georgia, completing his residency at Emory and setting up practice in Roswell, a relatively affluent, conservative suburb of Atlanta. In the 1990s, his practice, Compass Orthopedics, was among seven in the Atlanta area that merged into a large group that became known as Resurgens Orthopaedics. It became the largest orthopedic practice in Georgia, and now has 100 doctors and 1, 000 employees spread over 21 locations. Dr. Steven B. Wertheim, another founding partner of Resurgens, said one goal of the consolidation was to gain bargaining power with insurance companies and to provide M. R. I. s, physical therapy and even certain outpatient operations   rather than referring patients to other providers or operating at hospitals. More leverage with insurers often allows doctors to extract higher rates. “His overall gist was, ‘Look, if all we did was practice good medicine, we’d be broke by tomorrow,’” Dr. Wertheim said of Mr. Price. “He understood the need to run a business. ” As a physician, Mr. Price was constantly frustrated by having to seek insurance companies’ approval for his patients to get an expensive diagnostic test or physical therapy  —   a common complaint among specialists. Similarly, he resented when federal health regulators intervened in something he and his partners thought they were already doing well, like using electronic medical records. “Those are the things that drove him crazy,” Dr. Wertheim said. His resentment of government intervention in medicine drove Mr. Price to become involved in the Medical Association of Georgia early in his career, and his work there led him to run for office in 1995, when the House seat in his district opened up. But by 2002, as his legislative duties increased, he traded his suburban practice for a job at Grady Memorial Hospital, a vast, chaotic, aging complex, just a few blocks from the State Capitol. For the next two years, Mr. Price was the medical director of Grady’s orthopedic clinic, seeing a vastly different population than the   privately insured patients he was used to. Most of Grady’s patients are poor and black, and many lack any form of insurance. Long waits for care are the norm, and trauma, including gunshot wounds, is a big part of the caseload. “He called me and asked if there was a position,” said Dr. James R. Roberson, the chairman of the orthopedics department at Emory University School of Medicine, whose residents train at Grady. “He needed some flexibility  —   that was most of his impetus to want to return to Grady, because he was really very interested in pursuing a political career. ” Dr. Roberson said that Mr. Price played a “unique role” at the clinic, training residents and overseeing patient care but also seeking to address inefficiencies  —   long wait times, for example  —   and representing the clinic at hospital administrative meetings. Although he saw patients, he did not perform surgery or need to be on call at night  —   an unusual arrangement, Dr. Roberson said. In the Legislature, Mr. Price spent his first six years in the powerless minority, although he quickly rose to the position of minority whip. His fortunes changed in 2003, after Sonny Perdue became the first Republican governor since Reconstruction and persuaded enough Democrats to switch parties to put the Senate into Republican hands. As the majority leader, Mr. Price’s intimate knowledge of procedural rules and maneuvers, gleaned from assiduous research, helped advance his party’s agenda. In the state Legislature, he was the leader who delivered bad news, the   tactician to some of his   colleagues’ more backslapping style. His sense of humor, when he used it, was dry. Colleagues often wondered if he slept. “He’s a machine,” said Russell K. Paul, a Republican who served in the State Senate with Mr. Price. During his two years in the majority, Mr. Price’s top priority was curbing the rising cost of medical malpractice insurance, which he said was forcing hospitals and nursing homes to close and forcing doctors to limit which procedures they performed. “He was very bright, articulate, and smart enough to be able to see the different sides,” said Tom Bordeaux, a former Democratic state lawmaker and trial lawyer who negotiated with Mr. Price over a package of bills Mr. Price introduced to limit doctors’ liability in malpractice cases. “But he was just totally unwilling. He was very gracious and he was completely inflexible. ” Ultimately, Mr. Price failed to persuade even his Republican colleagues to accept a provision that would have capped    damages for malpractice victims at $250, 000. Mr. Paul, now the mayor of Sandy Springs, Ga. said Mr. Price had become more partisan during his last few years in the Legislature, when the Republicans saw an opportunity to tip the balance of power in their favor for the first time since Reconstruction. “There was not a lot of bipartisan collegiality when it came to trying to control the government in Georgia,” Mr. Paul said, “and that environment was the crucible that began to turn Tom into a hardened political warrior. ” In Congress, Mr. Price has made frequent speeches to health industry and physician groups, and has occasionally introduced legislation on their behalf. Last year, for example, he sponsored a bill fighting new lower Medicare payment rates for “durable medical equipment” like wheelchairs and canes. A few months later, he spoke at a conference for companies that supply such equipment, which held a $     on his behalf that same day. Mr. Price has also supported proposals to overhaul Medicare  —   potentially putting him at odds with his new boss, Mr. Trump, who has pledged not to “touch” the program. Speaking to a student group at the University of Michigan in 2015, Mr. Price expressed concern that Mr. Trump would not listen to others, including Congress, if elected. “When I hear Trump saying things like, ‘I’ll just do XYZ,’ without seemingly any regard for the legislative branch,” Mr. Price told the group, “it gives me some thought. ”

2 - People have fallen in love with their Instant Pots. They may like their blenders, cherish their slow cookers and need their food processors. But the Instant Pot  —   a device that combines an electric pressure cooker, slow cooker, rice cooker and yogurt maker in one handy unit  —   sends even   cooks into fits of passion. You find the “L” word over and over in the 15, 000 or so product reviews on Amazon. And if you click over to Instant Pot’s Facebook community page, you’ll find more than 360, 000 members sharing their undying affection alongside their recipes for chili. (A typical post: “I’m having an affair. My husband said he wished he would have never given me the Instant Pot for Christmas. ”) If you’re a cook and got through last year without bumping into people who couldn’t stop talking about their Instant Pots  —   or any of the other multifunctional electric pressure cookers on the market (Breville and Cuisinart both make versions)  —   then you won’t have to wait much longer. Electric pressure cookers is one of the fastest growing kitchen appliance sectors on the market, with sales doubling and tripling over the last four years, according to Robert Wang, the C. E. O. of Instant Pot Company. When the Instant Pot debuted in 2009, it was one of the first brands to hit North America electric pressure cookers were already gaining popularity in China. In 2010, approximately 300, 000 electric pressure cookers were sold in the United States and Canada, said Dr. Wang. By 2015, that number rose to over three million. (He declined to give exact sales figures, as did representatives from Breville and Cuisinart.) The majority of Instant Pots are sold on Amazon. More than 215, 000 units were sold on Amazon Prime Day 2016, in July, when Prime members get discounts on select items, outperforming any other product on the site. Two different models of the Instant Pot currently sit in the top 10 list of Amazon best sellers in the Kitchen and Dining category. So why do electric pressure cookers inspire such a devoted following? I bought one to find out. A confession: I already own a stovetop pressure cooker, the conventional kind that you would heat over a burner and then regulate yourself. It is currently supporting a colony of dust bunnies in the back of my highest cabinet, behind the panini press. I never got over my fear of exploding   soup to use it with any regularity. What makes this newest generation of electric pressure cookers different is that it is designed with a slew of   safety features, including sensors to monitor the unit’s temperature and amount of pressure. All you do is plug it in and tap a button, and it does everything else. It’s as   as a slow cooker  —   except that it gets dinner on the table a day or so faster. The promise of a fast, fresh homemade meal is a pressure cooker’s greatest appeal, said Lorna Sass, author of four pioneering cookbooks on pressure cooking, including “Pressure Perfect. ” “It doesn’t matter if you’re Paleo or vegan or just trying to eat better, pressure cooking is the answer for healthy fast food,” Ms. Sass said. After cooking a pork shoulder in the electric pressure cooker, I could easily see why the appliance has struck a chord, with the Paleo community in particular: It cooks large hunks of meat superbly and speedily. After a mere 90 minutes, the meat was spoon tender and deeply flavored, even before I covered the soft shreds with spicy barbecue sauce. The same recipe made in my slow cooker took seven hours, and the meat wasn’t quite as uniformly juicy. It was that pork shoulder that turned me into a believer. I continued to play, spending six weeks experimenting with the Instant Pot and a second electric pressure cooker, the Breville Fast Slow Pro. These are the two models recommended by my colleagues at The Sweethome, a product review site owned by The New York Times Company that put six electric pressure cookers through their paces. In terms of performance, I found the two to be more or less the same. Lamb shanks were velvety soft in 40 minutes, short ribs fell off the bone in 30, and spare ribs were porky perfection in 20 minutes. Perhaps most convenient, the   beef bone broth that took two days to cook down in my slow cooker was ready in an afternoon, without making the whole house smell like soup (which is nice for the first couple of hours but then gets really old). But the electric pressure cooker does have its shortcomings. The most notable failure in the meat category was the whole chicken. The recipes I tested came out with slack and soggy skin, and either stringy and dry white meat or undercooked dark meat. I did have more success with   skinless chicken breasts, which were evenly cooked and perfumed with the delicate rice wine and fresh ginger. A nice dish, though how often does one really want to eat steamed skinless chicken breasts? I didn’t like it much for vegetables either, most of which don’t benefit from the intense pressure of   steam (beets and artichokes being the important exceptions here). Broccoli, kale, zucchini, fennel, brussels sprouts and mushrooms turned limp and unappealing. They also took longer to cook than if I had used a skillet on the stove. The manual tells you an ingredient only needs, say, five minutes to cook, but that doesn’t take into account the 10 to 15 minutes required for the machine to build pressure, in addition to the time needed to release the pressure, which brings the total to around 20 minutes. I can do a lot of great things to vegetables with a skillet, some olive oil and garlic in 20 minutes. In general, this is a good rule of thumb: If something takes 20 minutes or less to cook conventionally on the stove, use the stove. Another pressure cooker downside: They just don’t do crisp or crunchy. Although most cookers allow you to brown meats and vegetables on the sauté function before cooking, any crunchy bits will wilt under the pressurized steam once you lock on the lid. Though I might use the pressure cooker for potatoes if I were going to mash them, I would never be able to achieve anything like the   roasted potatoes I can get in the oven. And in the future, I’ll stick to roasting my whole chickens, so I can crunch on the shards of browned, salty skin. The key to pressure cooker happiness is choosing recipes in which softness and succulence is the goal, and which traditionally take hours to get there. For example, I’ll never go back to a Dutch oven for chili, which I made in the electric pressure cooker in an hour starting from dried beans. Same goes for my favorite red lentil soup. Although I didn’t save any time when I tested it, I adored the convenience of not having to watch a pot on the stove. I could turn the pressure cooker on, then go for a run. When I got home, my soup was ready  —   a good thing since I was starving. And it’s amazing for chickpeas, which take an hour all told instead of the usual three to four hours for unsoaked beans. “People want to use their pressure cookers for everything, but they’re better for some things than others,” Ms. Sass said. “Stick to soups, stews, beans and risotto. It makes fabulous risotto. ” I’d have to agree Ms. Sass’s recipe for porcini mushroom risotto with peas is excellent, adaptable and about as easy as dinner gets (once you source the dried porcinis and arborio rice, that is). I also like the machine for polenta, which eliminates the stirring (and the splatters of molten blobs). But perhaps the biggest pressure cooker joy I found was for something as simple as   eggs. They didn’t cook faster, but even fresh eggs from the farmers’ market peeled effortlessly, without ending up pockmarked and riddled with craters the way they do when I boil them in a pot. This is because the pressure helps inflate the air pocket between the cooked white and the shell, which makes separating the two go more smoothly. I also tried out some of the other functions, including the slow cooker, rice cooker and yogurt maker settings. The unit worked as well as my separate,   slow cooker, though I can see a future in which I   more, and   less the results are similar, but one is a whole lot faster. For cooking rice, I preferred both the brown and white rice I made in my separate rice cooker. The pressure cooker was faster, but the rice a bit heavier and chewier. And for yogurt, which I’d gotten into the habit of making every other week on the stove, I have to admit that the machine worked like a dream. So after all that cooking, did I fall in love with the electric pressure cooker? It takes up a lot of space, it’s not at all intuitive, and I hate not being able to check on my food as it cooks. But even so, I don’t plan on giving mine up anytime soon. My friend Robin, who bought an Instant Pot six month ago, summed it up well. “I’m out of the honeymoon phase,” she said. “Now we’re settling into a relationship. And I’ve accepted its limitations, like the fact that there’s no reason to ever make oatmeal or rice in it. But between the lamb stew and the butternut squash soup, I know we will be together forever. ” Recipes: Pressure Cooker Chocolate Pudding | Pressure Cooker Spicy Pork Shoulder | Pressure Cooker Beef Short Ribs With Red Wine and Chile | Pressure Cooker Pork Salad With Pomelo and Garlic Chips | More Pressure Cooker Recipes



########################################################################################################################

3 - The Season 7 “Real Housewives of New Jersey” reunion show took place in October in a theater in Westbury, N. Y. An elaborate    thing had been constructed on a stage that would soon seat the five Housewives, complete with a   rug and zebra chairs, everything sparkling, everything  . The set was erected so specifically and thoroughly that it included a kitchen in the back, unusable but complete, that you could see only a fraction of, and a fireplace that the cameras would never pick up. “That’s not a real fireplace?” I asked a production assistant, who answered, “It’s not not real. ” The five contracted Housewives arrived on Long Island the night before for this   reckoning of the season’s tensions, equal parts State of the State panel discussion and   of every lunchtime confrontation that occurred at my   high school. The Housewives were shuttled in black S. U. V.s under the cover of darkness to a hotel more than two hours from where they live, in order to “throw off the scent to the press,” a publicist told me, though “scent” is a strange word choice here because anyone with a nose could have    the place from the sheer concentration of applied Shalimar. But there was good reason for the secrecy. Leaks from these reunion shows have been rampant, and after a previous one, Andy Cohen, the   mediator and the franchise creator (or as he says, “the person who gets credit for creating the franchise” when, really, a lot of other people were involved) realized that the leaks might be coming from the hair and makeup teams, who watch the live feed from a holding room. He told the producers to cut the audio to those dressing rooms. Since then, the integrity of his reunion show  —   if, again, “integrity” is the right word to describe the absolute ravaging of women by their former, current and future friends, accusing one another of everything from having had more than their admitted amount of plastic surgery to being an actual F. B. I. snitch  —   has been intact. The only leaks would be coming from Cohen, and they’d come when he decided they would come. Cohen prepared himself in a sunny, makeshift dressing room on the first floor, standing shirtless as he tried to choose a tie for the    —   yes, that’s    —   taping. His voice was a hoarse whisper, stubbornly projected through sheer will from deep behind his sternum. He had just come from disseminating his Andyness throughout the country on a speaking tour with his friend Anderson Cooper, in which both men told stories from their personal lives and drank Fresquilas on stage. There were a few    appearances for his coming book tour for “Superficial: More Adventures From the Andy Cohen Diaries. ” He had been talking for hours on his weekly radio shows (plural) as well as negotiating and announcing his new book imprint, Andy Cohen Books. He had been hosting his nightly live talk show on Bravo, “Watch What Happens Live With Andy Cohen. ” And of course, he continued to   the “Real Housewives” franchise, watching cuts of each episode for all seven cities, giving notes, hiring, firing, reconsidering and fielding    text messages from the stars of those shows, sometimes replying purely with emoji. I told him that the Housewives, who were waiting for the taping to begin, seemed nervous. “A lot of them view me as kind of their daddy in some weird, sick way, and their boss, and their friend, and their boyfriend, and their enemy  —   and so there’s a lot of different psychological layers happening in a situation like this,” he replied. “Some of them are volatile women. So it’s all real. It’s all real. ” Below the street, in their dressing rooms, the Housewives breathed through the tension. They had lived their reality on camera and watched the results. They had heard their Housewife colleagues talk about their behavior in   interviews. And they had built within themselves a caldron of anger, resentment and oh, yeah? s to what they had seen. So as not to dilute their fury, so as not to lose one moment of heat for the cameras, the publicists brought them to me separately through secured hallways, like Hannibal Lecter on his gurney. Teresa Giudice, who wore a satin evening gown and body shimmer (it was 8 a. m.) told me she used to be nervous about confronting certain cast members at these reunions, but now, since serving a prison term for fraud in 2015, which she continually refers to as “the time I went away,” she’s fine she’s ready for her day in court or whatever this is for her. She used to resent Cohen, because she thought he was hardest on her, but now she takes a more nuanced view. “I think he’s an amazing guy,” she said. “If he was straight, I definitely would date him. ” Jacqueline Laurita, who was Teresa’s best friend but has now replaced Melissa Gorga as Teresa’s sworn enemy for life, admitted that she was expecting a blood bath. “Yeah, it feels like you’re walking to the electric chair” is how she put it. She knew she would be held accountable for crimes that included calling Teresa a “criminal” and accusing Teresa’s allies of being her “soldiers. ” Jacqueline knew she just had to endure it. She has stopped trying to game Cohen at these things. “He greets you with a smile, and he has a way about him, and he makes you feel comfortable talking about things, and he can pull the best and the worst out of you with a smile on his face. ” She agreed that the best way to think of Cohen is the way you think of Jesus. You pray to him for blessings  —   to get more airtime, to get a rival off the show  —   but like Jesus himself, he answers prayers only sometimes. In his sunny dressing room up above, I asked Cohen how he’d feel if, like the Housewives, he were about to be confronted by everyone he’d interacted with this year. “I’m not on a reality show about my life” was his answer. It annoys him, this implication that what he’s doing is somehow cruel to the women who have signed up for it. But don’t you feel bad for them? I wanted to know. He shook his head, the way he would every time I didn’t get it. These women, who were once housewives, real housewives, are now businesswomen. Teresa Giudice is a   New York Times   author. Melissa Gorga has a successful clothing store. Jacqueline Laurita now has a platform to talk about her son’s autism and for her husband to sell a   brand called the Little Kernel. “I’m in a business relationship with these women,” he said. “They know what they’re doing. ” He put on his shirt and picked the striped tie. Walking out, he was intercepted by Kathleen French, a senior vice president at Bravo, who said that things had become a little too crazy the night before at the end of the “Real Housewives of Orange County” trip to Ireland. “Don’t tell me any more,” he said. “Let me just see it. ” He took his place in the fake living room and sat down. “Very casual,” he said as the women   out in their restrictive formal wear,   a deep mustard and hair spritzed to within an inch of   laws. “This is their Super Bowl,” he told me when I asked why they were in   tie before 8 a. m. Over the next few hours, as they said things like “Oh, really, bitch?” and “I was friends with Teresa when she was chasing a prostitution whore out of a country club” and “Do I look like an ape?” and “I’m turning you off” and “You’re a dumb bitch,” Cohen’s placid cool sometimes gave way to frustration. “Stay on your couches!” he beseeched them. “Don’t push Daddy!” He put a finger gun to his head as Teresa accused Jacqueline of selling a story to a tabloid. He won’t like that I began this article with the “Housewives. ” Cohen has hosted a nightly talk show now for more than seven years that features scintillating conversation with celebrities and (O. K. yes) clips of Bravo shows, but his guests are legitimate stars, like Meryl Streep and Oprah Winfrey and (O. K. yes) Real Housewives. “Watch What Happens Live” is doing well, with nearly 800, 000 viewers a night. The set just expanded to accommodate twice its   audience. But you can’t talk about Cohen without talking about the     empire that he helped create in 2006  —   a juggernaut of unscripted television, with all but one of the locales (it’s Dallas) averaging two or three million viewers per   episode. “Real Housewives” is watched sincerely, it is watched as camp. It is   it is   it is   it is pored over by at least one very funny podcast (“Bitch Sesh”) it is debated by feminists, it is singled out for a particular kind of cultural degradation that has seeped into our national conversation and it is fairly said to have been a factor in our recent elevation of a   host to the highest office of this country, a man who apparently spent Thanksgiving asking his guests,   style, whom he should pick for secretary of state. Cohen was at a Jewish Federation speaking gig in Washington recently when a man raised his hand and asked if he felt responsible for the level of discourse that the American republic had descended to in the last few months. It was two weeks before the election, and the question was fair. Over the 10 million episodes of “Real Housewives” I watched this fall, I heard people say to one another, “I just wanna friggin rip his balls off” and “Put away your penis . .. and maybe someone would treat you like a woman. ” I saw a woman flip a table when she was angry, a woman who threw her fake leg when she was angry (more on this later). I saw women demand respect, respect, respect, saying, “You don’t respect me” and “That is not respect” and “That’s disrespectful,” respect in the way that people who conduct themselves respectfully and respectably seldom feel the need to demand out loud. Over in the presidential debates, meanwhile, Hillary Clinton was called a “nasty woman,” and Donald Trump’s Twitter feed seemed as if it had been ghostwritten by Kelly Dodd, the Real Housewife of Orange County responsible for such Twitter pronouncements as: “Got my phone hacked with the fraud Dept. Going to get a private investigator and I’m going to sue  press charges!! Good luck Thunderdome. ” But Cohen told that man in Washington this: “First of all, the ‘Housewives’ are entertainment. Second of all, in the ‘Housewives universe,’ you get punished for behaving badly. There are consequences to it. ” The consequences to Donald Trump’s behavior, by contrast, seemed to be more people loving him. Had he seen the polls? I asked. He had made a similar speech to me, and I was skeptical. Trump’s not going to win, I told him. Cohen pursed his lips and raised his eyebrows and tilted his head back and forth in consideration. “You never know. ” I didn’t listen to him. No one did, not even when he conducted two televised and dubiously scientific polls of the people who tuned into “Watch What Happens Live” and turned up numbers based on about 60, 000 votes that said, actually, yes, Trump was going to win. He’s used to that. “There’s a lot of times when I will say something about politics, and people will immediately discount me, and I think it’s the easiest way to discount my show too. It’s just like, Oh, that’s the ‘Housewives’ guy, who cares?” Cohen explained a few weeks after the reunion. We were at Cafe Cluny in the West Village for lunch in the 3 p. m. hour, which is the approximate time lunch happens for someone who goes to bed at about 2 a. m. each night, often following a   massage. He ordered a salad and then stared down the three pieces of dark chocolate that came with the check. “I think I’m   about it, but on the other hand, if that’s what I am, I’m also good with it because it’s a wonderful thing to be. ” His voice didn’t get less hoarse over the months I spent with him. “You know what I mean?” He opened his mouth to say something else, only to remember that control in an interview resides with the person who can stop talking. “Look, I was a thinking person before the Housewives ever came. ” He took a piece of the chocolate. “I’ve been a TV producer for a long time  —   not that that’s Mensa, but I’ve had a career, and I made my own way. So I just think, If I ever say something that someone doesn’t want to hear, it’s a very easy thing to then say, Oh, well, coming from the ‘Housewives’ guy, oh, really, Mr. ‘Real Housewives’?” He is lately, at 48, consumed with trying to gauge exactly where he stands in the national esteem. When I first met him, in his downtown office, a few minutes before he went on the air, he asked me why I wanted to do an article on him. “I’m just not that introspective,” he said. I took this to mean he possessed the natural discomfort that a producer might have with someone else telling his story. But soon I realized it was more about positioning: Do we think of him as the “Housewives” guy  —   or as a former Bravo head of development who has a thriving production company? Or a guy with his own channel on Sirius XM Radio that features shows with Sandra Bernhard and Dan Rather? Or the author of three   books, or the host of a nightly talk show, the first one in late night with a working bar, no matter what James Corden says? He is no longer what he started out as on the talk show, the kind of person who could ask the question we wanted answered (like: Jacqueline, why would you sit on that woman’s lap after she threatened to “rage on your ass”? ). Now he’s one of the famous people. And so he is these days often trying to figure out a metric by which he can ascertain where he falls in the fame food chain. In “Superficial,” there’s a diary entry in which he talks about getting a   invitation from his good friend Sarah Jessica Parker to be her date for the Met Gala  —   so that’s data. But he goes to Ralph Lauren to get a tux for the event and the one he likes is being held for Bobby Cannavale, and he spends a little time trying to process that he doesn’t have more pull than Bobby Cannavale. Another tux he likes is being held for Johnny Depp, which is O. K. with him, because of course Johnny Depp. “It didn’t piss me off,” he insisted when I asked about the incident and his calculations surrounding it. “No. I was like, oh, O. K. oh, good, here’s a ranking, and now I know where I stand. They’re telling me where I stand. I’m finding out how this works. ” He paused for a second. “I’m just psyched that I’m getting a tux. ” O. K. maybe it did sting a little when Vanity Fair had an article devoted to the hosts of late night, and Cohen seemed to be the only one excluded from it. Trevor Noah hadn’t even made his debut yet! But again, this is just data. “Everything’s good,” he insisted. “I have my health. I have my show. I have my life. You know what I mean?” But also, “I think my show is a late show, you know?” Don’t read any of this as defeated or bitter. If there’s one thing about Cohen, it’s that his respect for the democratic rhythms of popular culture and popularity in general is total. He wants to watch the rise and fall of things, even himself, without trying to manipulate the process. He wants it all to play out. The people will decide, and watching what the people decide and how they decide is far more important than the decision itself. From a young age, there was something about Andy Cohen that his mother couldn’t quite put her finger on. They would watch “All My Children” together during the    era ( ) which she wondered if maybe other sons weren’t doing with their mothers. He had a Diana Ross poster on his wall. What was it, though? What was it? Then one day, she was watching him “prance” (her word) across the stage in his high school’s performance of “Carousel,” and a notion crept in and took hold. She got home that night and looked under his bed, where she found a healthy stash of gay porn. Now she was sure something was going on, but what? She spoke with a psychologist she knew who understood gay issues because he had a gay relative, and that psychologist told her that maybe she should stop looking under his bed. Andy was about to leave for college, for Boston University, and the psychologist said, “B. U. is a good place for him to go for that, he’ll meet a lot of other gay people,” and now his mother really began to suspect something was up. A few years later, Cohen wrote a   letter to a friend that he left on his parents’ kitchen table, and his mother read it and sat him down and asked him if he was sure. And he told her he was. A mother always knows. He knew he wanted to be onscreen even in high school, but he didn’t want to play characters. He wanted to be famous for being himself, but at the time, that idea didn’t truly exist yet outside the news and shows like Oprah and “Donahue. ” “I liked the idea of being myself in front of the camera. So, just me being me. I used to think if I could work on a morning show then I could be me. ” He got a job as an intern at CBS News, then as a producer there, but he started to burn out after 10 years. After a   run at the   Barry Diller cable network Trio, he landed at Bravo, where he helped develop breakout successes like “Top Chef” and “The Millionaire Matchmaker. ” Lauren Zalaznick, at the time president of Bravo, recalls someone coming in with hundreds of hours of documentary tape from a gated community in Orange County, Calif. which the producers needed to work. In that footage, Cohen saw something. “I don’t want to pretend like it was like lightning in a bottle at the beginning,” he said. “I was like: ‘This is a soap opera. This is a soap opera. ’’u2009” It was also something else. “This is real life. ”’ Right before the first season aired in 2006, he had a minor crisis over the opening credits. The “Housewives” shows usually begin with an introduction of each Housewife, posing in Grade A evening wear and announcing her tagline, which is part defensive apologia, part mission statement, part brand definition. But at the beginning, when they were editing the first season of Orange County, they went with sound bites from the show, like “I don’t wanna get old” and “  percent of the women around here have had breast implants” and “Are the police involved?” When Cohen saw the first cut, he ran to the office of Shari Levine, Bravo’s vice president of production, and told her she had to call the production company. The Housewives were going to think the producers were sabotaging them. But Levine told him the Housewives had already seen it  —   and they loved it. Cohen learned that day that people stand behind their behavior, and that trying to protect them from themselves is a fundamental act of disrespect: “These women, but maybe all women. I mean maybe all men, too I think all people want to be heard and understood. ” He learned too that people don’t need you to fight their battles, that they are entitled to them, even if you think they’re ridiculous. He learned that an audience will respond to however eccentric or stubborn or mean or dumb or kind a person is if that person is being authentic. “The things that you think might embarrass them they actually feel like, Well, I was standing up for myself,” he said. I eventually watched the episode of “Real Housewives of Orange County” that Kathleen French had warned Cohen about. It was part of a   arc in which the women go to Ireland so that one of them, Meghan, can track down her ancestors. (This is manifested as her actually tapping people on the shoulder in the street and asking if they are related to her.) Now, “Orange County,” which is the screechiest “Housewives” franchise, had experienced so far a year of immense healing, with the Housewives working on forgiveness. That went right out the window on this trip. Kelly, whom I mentioned earlier, is someone prone to saying things like: “What comes before Part B?  !” She also does the old    “What’s on your shirt?” and when you look down, she flicks you in the nose. Well, it was one such flick, which she administered to Vicki, that plunged the whole trip into darkness. Kelly wanted to know why Heather was so uptight about it, since Jews are supposed to have a good sense of humor. Heather called Kelly racist, and Kelly, of course, said: “I’m not being racist. I’m Mexican. ” Eventually, Tamra got involved, and Kelly said, “No wonder why her daughter isn’t talking to her,” which prompted Tamra to lunge for Kelly and curse and hit her, and they were all kicked out of the department store they were in. Something Cohen knows, a belief that began to take root in him back when he was watching “All My Children” with his mother, was that people who interacted would always create something interesting. That’s why he doesn’t understand why anyone would think that “Real Housewives” wasn’t real in some way. Or that it was too crass. Had people been on a subway recently? Had they read an online comments section? If anyone was under the impression that we were still in a Jane Austen novel in terms of national discourse and manners, it wasn’t Cohen’s fault that they were in for a rude awakening. It’s all real. It wouldn’t be compelling to watch if it weren’t. Teresa Giudice was having a real breakdown when she flipped that table in New Jersey. But in New York, when Aviva Drescher got angry and threw her prosthetic leg at Le Cirque, of all places, in a   effort to make her onscreen presence more interesting, well, that was the last we saw of Aviva. “It is very real to them,” he said. “And by the way, when it’s not, they’re off the show. ” A few months after the women from Orange County returned from Ireland and watched the episodes through holes between their fingers, they pulled themselves together for the reunion. They put on clothing appropriate for Christmas dinner at the White House if it were Cinderella’s   gathered on two separate couches with Andy in the middle, folded their hands in their laps and apologized to one another. A few days after the election, Cohen began book promotion for “Superficial. ” He started with a few local appearances, including one at the 92nd Street Y, where he was interviewed onstage by Sarah Jessica Parker. He had spent election night at her house, actually, and as soon as it became clear who the winner was, Cohen left the room to eat. A few days later, his optimism had mostly returned. Anderson Cooper told me when we met in St. Louis, “I think Oprah said to Andy, ‘You carry the light.’ When I heard that, I was like, That’s really true. ” Onstage at the Y, he had already come around enough to say that he thinks that at heart, Donald Trump is a Democrat. The liberal, largely Jewish crowd, who had been reading about the terrifying increase of hate crimes since the election and had begun to feel as if the world were closing in faster than they’d expected, responded with silence. We met at Cafe Cluny again a week later, and I asked him if he had noticed the silence. He said he didn’t get it. He wanted to know why everyone he knew was so surprised about all of this. I’d been watching the show, hadn’t I? I’d seen Tamra from “Orange County” call Alexis “Jesus Jugs,” hadn’t I? How was that different from calling Hillary Clinton “Crooked Hillary”? I’d watched in the primaries as Trump defended the size of his penis, right? “Wouldn’t that be the province of the Housewives if they were men?” He was right. Trump was not not like one of Cohen’s Housewives. He knew he had to be entertaining to stay on the show. He was willing to say anything to get his contract extended. Throughout his campaign, he pulled out the “I know something, but I’m not going to say it now” trick, most recently employed by Bethenny Frankel about dirt she has but won’t reveal about both Dorinda and Jules at the last “New York” reunion. At the debates, the candidates fought for time to speak and demanded that they be allowed the time they were promised, which is what happens at the reunions. When Cohen saw that, he told me, he thought, Lester Holt, I feel your pain. Anderson Cooper was a moderator of a debate in St. Louis that ended with the candidates saying something nice about each other, which is exactly how Cohen ends some “Real Housewives” reunions. It was one thing when people were copying his format for a talk show and pretending it was theirs, but now life is copying his format, and he’s still not quite getting credit for it  —   just blame. But isn’t that always the way for Cohen? He’s confronted from the audience, he’s confronted by that guy in Washington, and still he’s not getting the credit for what his gift actually is, which isn’t knowing how to deviously propel national discourse into the gutter but instead delivering to viewers what they want before they know they want it. And still, they mess up the name of his show, calling it “Watch What Happens Now. ” They accuse him of ruining America, when he carries the light. Even Oprah said it. Andy Cohen didn’t invent our society. To think that is to have missed the entire point of him. He simply predicted it. He saw it coming before we did, and he taped it. He has a lack of judgment about the way the world works, and therefore doesn’t have the willful ignorance that the rest of us do  —   yes, we’d seen Tamra call Alexis “Jesus Jugs,” and we insisted it was a tacky anomaly. But it wasn’t. It was the way the world works now. Andy Cohen isn’t how our culture got this way. He is simply a walking seismograph of it. Back at Cafe Cluny, I took one of the pieces of chocolate that came with the check he left the other two alone. I asked him what was going to happen next. He shrugged and opened his mouth to say something, pausing for what felt like a minute. Then he told me that it was all going to be O. K. and I decided to believe him.

3 - ■ Robert F. Kennedy Jr. one of the nation’s most prominent skeptics of childhood vaccines, says   Donald J. Trump has asked him to lead a vaccine panel. ■ Charlotte Church delivers a pungent “no” to the inaugural committee’s invitation to perform. Inaugural official says they were going for “soft sensuality” anyway. ■ A delay for the confirmation hearing of Mr. Trump’s pick for education secretary, Betsy DeVos. Mr. Trump on Tuesday asked a prominent   crusader to lead a new government commission on vaccine safety and scientific integrity, ushering debunked conspiracy theories about the dangers of immunization into the White House. Mr. Trump, who has embraced discredited links between vaccines and autism, has asked Robert F. Kennedy Jr. a nephew of President John F. Kennedy, to be chairman of the commission, Mr. Kennedy said after meeting with the   at Trump Tower. Mr. Kennedy’s appointment spread alarm through the medical community, which for years has rejected claims that childhood vaccines are linked to conditions like autism. Medical experts warned Tuesday that Mr. Trump’s actions would endanger children by confusing parents about the need to have them vaccinated. “It gives it a   that I frankly find frightening,” said William Schaffner, a professor of preventive medicine and infectious diseases at Vanderbilt University. He said Mr. Trump and Mr. Kennedy were being fooled by “ ” theories about vaccines. “This is going to be a sad struggle as we try to protect as many children as possible,” Mr. Schaffner said. Among his many political pursuits, Mr. Trump picked up the   cause a few years back. In 2012, he tweeted: And: These views, to say the least, are not the scientific consensus, any more than scientists believe that climate change is a Chinese plot  —   another theory once espoused by the  . Charlotte Church can sing in English, Welsh, Latin, Italian and French, but she won’t be doing so in any language for Mr. Trump’s inauguration. Ms. Church, the Welsh singer who began her public career at the age of 11 in the late 1990s, said on Tuesday that Mr. Trump’s inaugural team had reached out to her about performing during the festivities. She was, to put it nicely, less than interested. (Yes, those emoji are what you think they are.) Ms. Church’s wasn’t the only door slamming shut on Mr. Trump’s team on Tuesday. The other belonged to Rebecca Ferguson, a British singer who rose to prominence on the country’s “X Factor” and said she would perform only if she could sing Billie Holiday’s “Strange Fruit. ” The inaugural team was apparently less than enthusiastic. Mr. Trump’s team has secured performances by the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, the    Jackie Evancho and the Radio City Rockettes. They are expected to dribble out more artists soon. Meh, they didn’t want Charlotte Church anyway. Tom Barrack Jr. a close friend of Mr. Trump’s who is planning the inauguration, told reporters in Trump Tower on Tuesday that Mr. Trump was not looking for “ ” to perform anyway. “We’re fortunate in that we have the greatest celebrity in the world, which is the ” Mr. Barrack said. He added, “so what we’ve done instead of trying to surround him with what people consider   is we are going to surround him with the soft sensuality of the place. It’s a much more poetic cadence than having a circuslike celebration that’s a coronation. ” “Soft sensuality” is not generally what comes to mind when one thinks of Washington, D. C. in January, but the city is changing. Senate Democrats have been complaining that there are too many hearings for Mr. Trump’s nominees on Wednesday  —   at one point there were six scheduled  —   and Republicans, eager to get Mr. Trump’s team in place, have relented a bit. They moved Betsy DeVos, his pick for education secretary, to Jan. 17. Ms. DeVos’s wealth and complicated finances have made the process of unraveling her potential conflicts of interest through the Office of Government Ethics a bit more complicated, so she was perhaps the most logical person to bump. The office, in a letter to Senator Patty Murray of Washington, the ranking Democrat on the Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee, made it clear that Ms. DeVos’s background check is far from complete, and that it would be inappropriate to move forward without it. Republicans have maintained the date for her vote out of the HELP Committee: Jan. 24. Two military experts told the Senate Armed Services Committee on Tuesday that an exception should be made so that James N. Mattis, a recently retired Marine Corps general, can serve as secretary of defense in the Trump administration. The hearing on the importance of civilian control of the military, which was led by Senator John McCain of Arizona, is intended to set the stage for the committee’s confirmation hearing on Mr. Mattis’s nomination on Thursday. Military officers are barred by law from serving as defense secretary unless they have been out of office for seven years. Mr. Mattis retired from the military in May 2013. But in an encouraging sign for his prospects, the lawmakers appeared to be generally receptive to the experts’ arguments. “The principle of civilian control of the military is precious,” said Eliot A. Cohen, a professor at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, who served as State Department counselor during the George W. Bush administration. But Mr. Cohen, who was a “Never Trumper” during the campaign, argued that an exception should be made because Mr. Mattis was a person of integrity and had vital experience at a time when the Pentagon has to contend with multiple threats, and because he might dissuade the incoming administration from acting recklessly. “A Secretary Mattis would be a stabilizing and moderating force, preventing wildly stupid, dangerous and illegal things from happening, and over time helping to steer American foreign and security policy in a sound and sensible direction,” Mr. Cohen said. Kathleen H. Hicks, an expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, also said that it was appropriate to make an exception for Mr. Mattis and praised his character and expertise. “It should never be considered ‘time for a general’ to fill the   nonelected civilian position in the operational chain,” she said, referring to Mr. Trump’s comments in a November interview. “I assess the state of U. S.   relations to be strong enough to withstand any risk such a     exception, on its own, could pose,” she added.   Trump’s transition team is considering asking the deputy defense secretary, Robert Work, to remain in his position at the Pentagon for several months after Mr. Trump’s inauguration, according to an official familiar with the discussions. While no final decision has been made, the official suggested that Mr. Work could provide some initial bureaucratic stability as Mr. Mattis builds his team at the Pentagon. Last month Mr. Trump announced his intention to nominate Vincent Viola as Army secretary. Mr. Work’s consideration was posted on Twitter by Jennifer Griffin of Fox News and also reported by The Washington Post. Mr. Work could not be reached for comment Monday night. This one will hurt. Two prominent   lawmakers, Representative John Lewis of Georgia, a civil rights hero, and Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey, will be the Democrats’ star witnesses against Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, Mr. Trump’s nominee to be attorney general. Mr. Sessions’s nomination to be a federal judge in 1986 was derailed by allegations of racial bias, and he has drawn opposition from   groups. Both lawmakers will have their own particular resonance. Mr. Lewis, a lieutenant of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. ’s, was beaten bloody on the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Ala. a seminal moment in the civil rights movement. Mr. Booker, the former mayor of Newark, may lack the historical gravitas of Mr. Lewis, but he may hold more weight for one reason: He will be testifying against a fellow senator. He is believed to be the first sitting senator set to testify against a fellow sitting senator  —   ever. In a large show of military opposition to reinstating torture, 176 retired officers  —   including 33   generals and admirals  —   have sent a joint letter to Mr. Trump urging him not to follow through on his campaign vows to bring back waterboarding “and a hell of a lot worse. ” The letter, obtained by The New York Times, was dated Jan. 6 and signed by some of the most prominent military figures of the recent era. They included two former Afghanistan war commanders, Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal and Gen. John R. Allen, and the Special Operations commander who oversaw the raid that killed Osama bin Laden, Adm. William H. McRaven. Citing their “six thousand years of combined experience” in commanding troops, the retired officers expressed concern “about statements made during the campaign about the use of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of detainees in U. S. custody,” and they noted that waterboarding and other “enhanced interrogation techniques” are illegal under domestic and international law. The officers also called torture both “unnecessary” and “counterproductive,” adding that it “violates our core values as a nation. ” “Our greatest strength is our commitment to the rule of law and to the principles embedded in our Constitution,” the letter continued. “Our servicemen and women need to know that our leaders do not condone torture or detainee abuse of any kind. ” During the presidential campaign, Mr. Trump said he would bring back waterboarding and more for the interrogation of terrorism suspects  —   contending that “torture works,” and even “if it doesn’t work, they deserve it anyway. ” The letter makes clear that Mr. Mattis, Mr. Trump’s pick for defense secretary, is not alone in recoiling against torture. Those signing also included a former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Hugh H. Shelton a former commander of the Central Command, Gen. Joseph Hoar and four former commanders of the Southern Command: Gen. Douglas Fraser, Gen. James T. Hill, Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey and Adm. James G. Stavridis, who went on to be the NATO supreme allied commander. The list also included two former directors of the National Security Agency, Gen. Keith Alexander and Adm. Bobby Ray Inman a commandant of the Marine Corps, Gen. Charles C. Krulak and chiefs of staff of the Army and the Air Force, Gen. Dennis J. Reimer and Gen. Merrill A. McPeak. In public, President Obama and his top officials have been careful to keep the smiles pasted on their faces when it comes to their successors, but Michael Froman, Mr. Obama’s United States trade representative, will let the smile slip this morning in a speech billed as a “farewell address. ” In prepared remarks, Mr. Froman does not mention Mr. Trump by name, but he leaves little doubt that he disdains the incoming president’s views on trade, particularly Mr. Trump’s opposition to a proposed trade agreement among Pacific Rim nations that Mr. Froman labored on for years. “I can’t imagine why any president would want to abdicate our leadership in the   to be responsible for handing the keys of the castle to China, for driving our historic allies and China’s historic rivals into China’s arms,” Mr. Froman’s prepared text reads. Mr. Froman describes Mr. Trump’s opposition to the deal, the central achievement of Mr. Froman’s tenure as United States trade representative, as “the biggest gift any U. S. president could give China. ”



########################################################################################################################

4 - One night six years ago, on a quiet side street in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, I came across a photo album that had been put out with the trash. I lived around the corner, and I was walking home when I saw it sitting beneath a streetlamp on Lincoln Place. It looked handmade, with a wooden cover bound with a shoelace. But it had been tied up with twine, like a bunch of old newspapers, and left atop a pile of recycling. After hesitating a moment, I picked it up and took it home. The pages were fragile, and they cracked when I turned them, as if the album hadn’t been opened in a long time, but the photos were perfectly preserved. They seemed to chronicle the life of a black couple at midcentury: a beautiful woman with a big smile and a man who looked serious, or was maybe just   and had served in World War II. As I turned the pages, the scenery changed from country picnics to city streets and crowded dance halls in what appeared to be Harlem, and the couple went from youth to middle age. Looking at the album, I was struck by how joyful the photos were  —   and by the fact that as fabled as this era was, I had never seen a black family’s own account of that time. I wondered who these neighbors were, and who had thrown the album out. For decades, this part of Crown Heights had been mostly black. When I arrived in the neighborhood, several years before, I was one of the few nonblack residents on the block. The neighborhood was changing, though newcomers were arriving and longtime residents were moving out. I went back to Lincoln Place, hoping to find the album’s owner it had surely been thrown out by mistake. Lincoln Place was the very image of old Brooklyn promoted by real estate agents. On other blocks, the houses were carved up or crumbling. Or they had been torn down and replaced by big buildings with spotlights and   signs. But on Lincoln Place, the stately rowhouses were still intact and well loved. The block was preserved in amber. I knocked on doors and left my number, but I never heard from anyone. So I put the album on my bookshelf. A few years later, my landlords got an offer they couldn’t refuse, and my short time in Crown Heights was up. I stumbled upon the album while packing and pulled it off the shelf. Now I really had to reckon with it. Gentrification was transforming the neighborhood  —   soon there might be no one left who recognized the world in these pictures. And the album was literally falling apart in my hands. If I was ever going to try to get to the bottom of it, this was the time. I decided to uncover its story. I thought it would be simple. But chasing the album would become something of a journey, one that would take me far from   Brooklyn to the Jim Crow South, from a remote island in the Pacific to the packed tenements of Harlem, before returning me to Lincoln Place at another moment of great change. Last spring, I began the search. The photos were arranged on black   pages with little mounting corners and Scotch tape that had turned yellow with age. There were 167 pictures, and they covered both sides of the pages, as if to save space. But the photos stopped about halfway through the album. The rest of it was blank. I looked behind every photo, but there were only a few clues, handwritten notes like “From your old pal Duke,” “Myself and Sylvia” or “Love to Etta Mae, From Dorothy. ” The name Etta Mae was written on three or four photos, and I began to suspect she was the woman who appeared throughout the album. She had a full figure and elegant hands. She smoked. But I always spotted her by her smile. She was often with the same man. They were embracing, or they were in separate photos on the same page. I guessed that he was her husband on one photo, someone had written, “To my best friend’s hubby. ” Carrying photocopies of a few pictures, I went back to Crown Heights. I had been gone less than two years, but there were all sorts of changes. On Nostrand Avenue, a West Indian market that had carried buckets of salt cod had closed. Where once the only coffee had come in yellow cans of Bustelo, cafes served locally roasted espresso. There was a retro cocktail bar. On Lincoln Place, a   sign hung outside one house, and another was under renovation. There was a Pilates studio. There were more young families now, and when I asked them about the album as they swept the sidewalk or sat on their stoops, they apologized: They were new to the block and couldn’t help. One evening, I was close to giving up when a young man in a garden apartment told me to talk to Jimmy, the oldest guy on the block. He pointed to a red house a few doors down. An old man answered the door. Yes, he said, he was Jimmy  —   James Burton. I showed him the photocopied pictures, and he squinted. “That’s Mrs. Taylor,” he said. “Etta Mae. ” The man in the pictures was her husband, Isaiah Taylor. Everyone called him Ike, Mr. Burton said. The Taylors had lived on Lincoln Place forever. He pointed next door, at a white house with classical molding. When I returned to Lincoln Place a few days later with the whole album, Mr. Burton and his wife, Lenore, were doing a puzzle at a card table. “You say you just found this album on the street?” she asked, laughing. “I wouldn’t touch it. I’m amazed you would touch it. ” “Would you pick it up?” she asked her husband. “Maybe,” he said. They were in their late 80s. Ms. Burton had worked as a bookkeeper, and Mr. Burton had been a chauffeur and a shipping clerk. They had lived on Lincoln Place since the early 1950s, and raised their two daughters there. The Taylors had been their neighbors and close friends, almost like family. “In those days, we knew most everybody, and then they started disappearing and dying and moving away,” Mr. Burton said. “Now I’m lucky if I know 10 people. ” We sat on the couch and opened the album. Pages had torn loose from the binding, and as we passed them between us, black flakes fluttered to the floor. “No, no,” Mr. Burton said, peering at the faces to see if he recognized anyone. “Etta and Ike. That’s all I know is them two. ” Halfway through, we came to a page crowded with small pictures. Mr. Burton paused. “That looks like me,” he said, his voice a little louder. “Your mother, Uncle Fernando  —   that’s my wedding. ” I was hooked. Now that I had names, I enlisted a researcher at The New York Times, Susan C. Beachy, and she pulled documents for Etta Mae Taylor: census records birth, death and marriage certificates old phone books newspaper clippings. Etta Mae didn’t have children. Her siblings had all died. But she had relatives scattered across the country. The Burtons remembered a niece from North Carolina, and the researcher found someone in Raleigh named Joann Barnes. She was now in her 70s. For months, the only other thing I knew about her was that she didn’t pick up her phone. I didn’t blame her. “Hello,” I would say when I left voice mail messages, “I’m calling about a photo album that may have belonged to your family. ” Even as I said it, I knew it sounded like a scam. I tried her relatives, calling, sending emails and friendly Facebook messages, but always with the same result: silence. The documents, at least, gave me the beginnings of Etta Mae’s story. Etta Mae Barnes was born on July 28, 1918, in Wilson, N. C. which once called itself the world’s greatest   tobacco market. When Ms. Taylor was young, it was a boomtown. Thousands of   families had migrated to Wilson from the countryside to pick tobacco on farms and hang it in big warehouses downtown. The first pages in the album seemed to be of Wilson several photos had stamps from photographers’ studios there. There were portraits of women in flouncy dresses, babies, a boy with a dog, a group in straw hats in a field. In two portraits placed side by side, a   couple posed by a flowering bush, in front of a clapboard house. I wondered if they were Etta Mae’s parents. Etta Mae’s mother, Anna Bell Green Barnes, was born in Virginia and worked as a hanger at a tobacco company, the documents revealed. Her father, James Frank Barnes, was a grocery store clerk. His family went back generations in Wilson County. Etta Mae was one of six. When she was still a child, her oldest brother, Charles, boarded the train that passed through Wilson and became part of what we now call the Great Migration, the exodus of millions of black Southerners from the Jim Crow South. Judging from the album, many of Etta Mae’s relatives had gone north I could tell them apart from their country kin by their suits and furs. Etta Mae left school after seventh grade and went to work as a housekeeper in a private home, according to the 1940 census. That year, 10 other people were living at the Barneses’ including an aunt an adopted daughter Etta Mae’s sister Mildred Mildred’s husband, Jack Artis and their baby, Charles. In 1940, Etta Mae left her crowded home. But she didn’t go north just yet. She went to Suffolk, Va. where, according to her marriage license, she wed Isaiah Taylor on the day after her 22nd birthday. Ike Taylor was three years younger than Etta Mae, and when they married, he had recently graduated from high school and was working as a deliveryman. His father was a cook. His mother worked at a peanut processing plant. Suffolk, like Wilson, was segregated, unofficially divided by the railroad tracks. On one side, a sizable black community had grown, drawn by jobs in the factories of peanut producers like Planters. The Taylors’ wedding announcement in a local paper said, “The couple will reside here. ” But in 1941, the United States entered World War II, and farm work had grown scarce amid an agriculture crisis. Hundreds of thousands of black Southerners rushed to enlist, and Ike was one of them. There were about a dozen photographs from the war in the album, loose snapshots tucked in the back. They showed black soldiers amid spindly trees and what looked like Japanese shrines. Ike was an army truck commander in the 510th Port Battalion and rose to the rank of master sergeant, according to his military records. His unit was stationed on Tinian, an island in the Pacific that the United States captured from the Japanese, where the armed forces built a huge air base. (It was from Tinian that the Enola Gay took off for Hiroshima.) Today, most of the men in Ike’s unit would be approaching 100, if they were alive at all, and I had given up on getting a firsthand account, when I found a videotaped interview with a member of the 510th in the Library of Congress. James W. Taylor (no relation to Ike) died in 2014. In the video, he described their time in the army. The armed forces were still segregated, and there were almost no black combat units until troops thinned at the end of the war black soldiers were instead relegated to labor and service units. Their battalion unloaded ammunition from ships and provided transport. On Tinian, they lived apart from the white soldiers. They slept in tents in a separate camp, ate separately and drank from water tanks that they filled, separately, from a mountain spring. These men may have enlisted in the army to escape Jim Crow, but instead they found themselves on a tropical island in the Pacific that had become a replica of the segregated South. This was where records trailed off. To go any further, I needed a guide. One night in the fall, I found one. I got a Facebook message from someone in Wilson named Craig Barnes Jr. whom I had written to months before. “Sorry, I’m just seeing this now,” he said. “Do you still have that photo?” I replied immediately with a smiley face. “I have the entire album!” Over the phone, Mr. Barnes, 25, said that he was related to Etta Mae, but that he didn’t know much about her the person to talk to was his grandmother, Joann Barnes  —   the woman in Raleigh who hadn’t taken my calls. He promised to set up a conversation, but weeks went by. When we finally spoke, he had bad news: She wasn’t answering the phone. But that was all I had. So a week later, I boarded a flight for Raleigh, the album in my bag. I met up with a photographer and we drove to the last listed address for Ms. Barnes: a retirement complex in a   apartment building surrounded by trees. I was unsure if she even lived there, much less how she would feel about my visit, and as we approached, I felt nervous for the first time. I had come all this way, and though I thought the album was important, maybe I was just intruding. I pressed the buzzer and identified myself over the intercom as a reporter from New York. After a long moment, a woman’s voice crackled through the speaker. “All right,” she said. “I’ll buzz you in, dear. ” As we walked down the hall toward her apartment, Ms. Barnes stepped out from her door, as if she planned to give us only a minute. She had short gray hair and wore a   blouse. “Are you a relative of Etta Mae Taylor?” I asked. “Yes, I was her niece,” she said. I explained, quickly, how I had met the Burtons, that they had told me Etta Mae’s name and that I should look for her niece. “O. K.,” she said. “And, well,” I said, “basically, I found this on the street. ” I held out the album. She gave a surprised laugh. I laughed too, with relief. “You know, it kind of makes you leery,” Ms. Barnes said. She had gotten my messages, and her grandson’s, but she was skeptical because she had never seen her aunt’s photo album. She invited us in. Her apartment was small and neat. She had been cleaning, and after she washed her hands, we sat down. She was from Wilson, she said, but she left when she was young and spent nearly 30 years in New York, where she was a visiting nurse. She opened the album. “Oh, my goodness,” she said. “These are from way back. ” She spotted her grandparents  —   Etta Mae’s parents  —   in front of the clapboard house in Wilson where she, too, had grown up. There, in the yard, they played horseshoes and caught pigeons. She named her aunts and uncles and cousins. “And that’s me,” she said, touching a photo of a little girl. “I always liked this picture. I believe my father made this skirt. He used to make clothes for me when I was small. And I always had those big bows. ” She shook her head and smiled. “Little knock knees,” she said. Wilson was about an hour’s drive east. The downtown was deserted, the brick warehouses the only remnant of the tobacco era. Across the tracks, the house where Etta Mae grew up had been torn down. In the empty lot where it once stood, there was no trace of the family that had become so real to me. A pickup was parked in the overgrown grass. Most of Etta Mae’s family had left Wilson and scattered, but Craig Barnes Jr. was still there. We met up at an Applebee’s off the highway. I thanked him for writing to me and handed him the album. As he turned the pages, I said I had never seen a black family’s photos from this era. He said he hadn’t either. “The lifestyle they’re living looks amazing,” he said. In Etta Mae’s day, the magic of Harlem reached the South through newspapers, relatives’ letters and the radio, and in the 1940s, another wave of Southern migrants moved to New York, drawn by Cab Calloway and Duke Ellington as much as by the promise of factory jobs. “New York was the place to be,” Ms. Barnes said. While Ike was in the Pacific, Etta Mae joined her sister Mildred and her husband, along with her brother Charles, in Harlem, and the sisters found jobs pressing drapes at a factory in the garment district. “They were pressers,” Ms. Barnes said. “That was kind of the going job at the time. ” When the war was over, Ike and Etta Mae were reunited in New York. On weekends, they would go dancing  —   at small clubs and at the blocklong Savoy Ballroom on Lenox Avenue, where thousands of couples did the jitterbug. From the time she was little, Ms. Barnes would take the train every year to visit the Taylors. “I was a Southern girl I used to go every summer with my grandmother,” she said. “When I would see them dressed up, it was exciting. Like these were some movie stars or something. ” Of her two aunts, Ms. Barnes said, Etta Mae was the serious one. “Mae thought she was the boss. She always thought she was smarter than everybody else. She was always saying, ‘Sister, you shouldn’t do that Sister, you should. ’” But she loved to dance, Ms. Barnes said. “And she could sing, too. ” The photos speak to the glamour of life in Harlem, but they barely hint at its struggles. Housing discrimination largely confined black people to Harlem, and in the 1940s, as more Southern migrants surged into the city, its blocks became some of the most densely populated in the world. Landlords charged high rents and let their buildings fall into ruin. They knew their tenants had nowhere else to go. After riots broke out in 1943, Langston Hughes wrote of Harlemites’ poverty and frustration: “Some of them don’t try anymore.   I reckon. ” Etta Mae and her sister lived in a packed tenement on West 116th Street. Their brother Charles, who in the album looks dashing in a dark suit with a pocket square, worked as a deliveryman for a florist, and shared his apartment on 131st Street with his wife and seven lodgers from the South. In the middle of the album was a series of oversize portraits of couples gathered around   tables in night clubs. I couldn’t figure out where they were taken until a clue cropped up in an old newspaper: Ike was listed among the members of the Eight Chaps Social Club, a men’s club composed of Suffolkians that was hosting a dance in Harlem. Seven of the Chaps were dead now, but the eighth picked up the phone. “Isaiah Taylor?” Walter Howell, 95, said. Of course he remembered him. “Good buddy of mine. ” He told me the photos were, indeed, from the club’s dances. They look glamorous, but all of the Chaps, Mr. Howell said, had   jobs. He had worked in a   plant preparing minks and sables. Then he answered a question that hadn’t occurred to me, which was why the Taylors had such a dazzling record of their social life. The reason was that one member of the club, Jesse Williams, was a professional photographer. Craig Steven Wilder, a historian at M. I. T. told me that for Southern migrants far from home, men’s clubs like the Eight Chaps “become their new kinship networks. ” “That informal network is how you access news about where you can move,” Professor Wilder said, “where black people are moving and welcome. ” In 1950, the population of Central Harlem reached its peak, and   began to inch their way into other boroughs. The Eight Chaps scattered. Etta Mae and Ike, of course, went to Brooklyn. Crown Heights was predominantly white at the time. And when Etta Mae and Ike moved to Lincoln Place around 1950, renting a room from a black hairdresser named Lucille Stewart, they became some of the first black residents on the block. The Burtons, the neighbors whose wedding photos were in the album, came soon after. “We were about the second blacks on the block,” Lenore Burton said. Ms. Burton’s parents, Clara and Cannon Harper, moved into the white house with the classical molding, with their daughter Jackie. After they got married, the Burtons bought the red house next door. Etta Mae and Ike soon moved into the third floor of the Harpers’ white house, and the two households became like one. Etta Mae’s album captures their communal life: They shared meals, gave each other haircuts, gathered in the kitchen in their bathrobes. Ms. Burton’s sister, Jackie Jones, still lives in the white house that she grew up in and eventually inherited from her parents. On one of my visits to the Burtons’ she appeared, magically, in their living room: Back in the 1950s, they had installed a door between their homes. “All the families were intertwined more or less, though they weren’t blood relations,” Ms. Jones, 89, said. The picture the Burtons painted of the 1950s was a happy one. And it took me a moment to step back and see the obvious: During this time, as black people arrived on Lincoln Place, white families were leaving. Isabel Wilkerson, the author of “The Warmth of Other Suns: The Epic Story of America’s Great Migration,” said the timing was not a coincidence. “Fear led many white residents to flee,” she said. “Neighborhoods began to open up because white people were so fearful that they would sell at a loss. ” It was a sign of what was coming. In the next decades, hundreds of thousands of white families would leave the city, and black families would move into their homes, a phenomenon that came to be known as white flight. In 1950, the Taylors’ census tract was 95 percent white. By 1970, it was 87 percent black. White flight is often associated with the poverty and crime that plagued New York City in the later decades of the 20th century, and conjures images of muggings, abandoned buildings and urban blight. But these photos too were images of the   era: People posing beside a 1950s television console, a man at a piano, a sunny picnic. In 1956, the new homeowners formed the Lincoln Civic Block Association, which still exists. “There was a Pokeno circle, a poker circle,” Mr. Burton said. “You’d go from house to house. Nobody had a lock on the door. Our house was never locked. You’d look up, and there’d be cousin   . ” The Burtons pointed out a few houses on Lincoln Place where   still lived. A neighbor, Marilyn LeGall, 72, grew up visiting her aunt and uncle on Lincoln Place. “You played stickball, you jumped rope,” she said. “Everyone looked after the other. ” That was life on Lincoln Place, said Arthur Bates Jr. 56, who grew up on the block. “It was a real neighborhood, and a black experience no one talks about, because it wasn’t filled with drugs and it wasn’t filled with poverty,” Mr. Bates said. “It was public schools, it was playing ball, it was playing music. ” Now, he added, everyone was discovering brownstone Brooklyn. “It’s been sitting here, like so many aspects of our lives. People say, ‘It’s dripping with original details.’ Who do you think maintained it? Where were you?” Etta Mae and Ike settled down on Lincoln Place after a decade of war and uncertainty and living in cramped quarters in Harlem. Etta Mae kept working in the garment district. She went bargain hunting on Flatbush Avenue for outfits and nice furniture for their apartment. She joined a book club. Ike got dogs  —   and cars. “A blue Chevy,” Mr. Burton recalled. On the weekends, they would go to their dances, and Mildred came over. They drank cocktails and listened to records. “They were   folks,” Ms. Jones said. “You could come and sit and drink and smoke and laugh. They loved to laugh. ” They traveled, driving south to see one of Ike’s sisters in Washington, and to their hometowns. In the 1960s, they went on cruises. New York gave them a good life. And if it was lived in the shadow of white flight, it was a life they never could have had in the South. Ike’s niece, Brenda Oliver, 67, remembered her aunt arriving in Virginia wearing pretty clothes, smelling good. Ms. Oliver’s mother was a maid. “My mom lived in a house with a coal stove. She was so impressed that her siblings had gotten out of the South and made a life for themselves. ” In their later years, Ike and Etta Mae look content. In one photo, they stand beside each other, she in a dress, he in a suit. She is giving him a knowing little smile. His arm is around her shoulder. It is the last photo of the two of them together. On Aug. 5, 1971, Ike died of cancer. He was 50. After he died, Etta Mae stopped keeping the album. That was why half of the pages were blank. Etta Mae stayed on Lincoln Place. She took care of children for working couples, recalled the Burtons’ daughter, Carol Burton, 58. Etta Mae got books in the mail, never putting them on the shelf until they were read. She went to church every Sunday, at Berean Baptist nearby. She took in relatives once or twice, for brief spells, but otherwise lived alone. I found former residents of Lincoln Place. They remembered Etta Mae, but not as the young woman in the album. “She was always an old lady,” Sherrie Tanner Hammonds, 47, said. She grew up on the block with her grandmother, Ms. Stewart, the hairdresser, and now lives in Rochester. “She always had a small dog. She had a little set schedule. She would walk morning and night. ” “Rain or shine,” said Constance P. Jermin, 83, who left Lincoln Place for Georgia in 2002. “She was very deliberate and devoted. And she always greeted everyone. Always with a big smile. ” For a few years, Etta Mae and I shared the block. Our bedroom windows looked out on the same backyards, and every day, she must have walked past my house, though I can’t recall if I ever actually saw her. When she could no longer get around, Ms. Jones, her landlady, took care of her. “She was feisty,” said Ms. Jones, who said she never raised her rent from $200. “She was good until the end. ” The end was swift. In 2010, Etta Mae fell and went to the hospital, and from there, to a nursing home in East New York, Brooklyn. She died there, five long miles from Lincoln Place, on June 4, 2011. She was 92. She is buried next to her husband at Long Island National Cemetery, a veterans’ graveyard in Farmingdale, N. Y. They share a single headstone, their names on either side. Etta Mae’s funeral program ends, “Etta lived a full life. ” It was all in the album: the Great Migration, Harlem at its most chaotic and crowded, the transformation of Brooklyn. For her neighbors on Lincoln Place, Etta Mae’s album brought back happy memories of their first years on the block, but it did not stop the clock from ticking. In October, Lenore Burton died. Her widower, James Burton, plans to stay in their home on Lincoln Place. For Etta Mae’s family, the album helped fill the void left by relatives who moved to the North. They let me hold onto the album until the publication of this article. I had one last question: How did the album end up on the curb? After her aunt died, Joann Barnes came from Raleigh to arrange the funeral in Brooklyn. She hadn’t been to Lincoln Place in years and was surprised by how little her aunt’s home had changed. She had moved into the back rooms and left the rest untouched. Everything was from the 1950s  —   the kitchen sink and cabinets, the furniture in the living room, which was covered in plastic. In Ike’s old office, there was a record player, hundreds of records, and a shelf with glasses and little stirrers, the remnants of his bar. The closets were stuffed with linens and old clothes. When she went to dry her hands after washing them in the bathroom, the hand towel was so old it split in two. She was tired from the funeral, and overwhelmed. She just wanted to get home. She packed up some wedding dishes for her sister, a few pots and pans. For herself, she took some change from a drawer. “A silver dollar, some old coins,” she said. “That’s just me. I have my memory of her and our trips and what we did together. I’m not a keeper. ” As she got ready to go, Ms. Jones came in. “She asked me if I was coming back,” Ms. Barnes said, “and I said no. ‘Open the doors and let the neighbors come and take what they want. Just open it up. ’” In the weeks afterward, Ms. Jones worked her way through the apartment. She bagged up the clothes. She pulled the records off the shelf. She boxed up Etta Mae’s books. When she found the album, she tied it up with twine. And one evening, before the trucks came to pick up the recycling, she carried it outside with a few boxes and left it on the curb. A few minutes, or a few hours, passed. Then, just as Etta Mae had walked past my house so many times before, I walked by hers, picked up her album and carried it home.

4 - Most mornings at 4:30, half an hour before the “first call” awakens inmates at the Fort Leavenworth military prison in Kansas, an alarm rings within an    cell. Inmate 89289, slightly built with short hair, rises to apply makeup and don female undergarments and a brown uniform before the   men in the adjacent cells stir. That is the routine for Chelsea Manning, America’s most famous convicted leaker and the prison’s most unusual inmate. She is serving the longest sentence ever imposed for disclosing government secrets  —   35 years  —   and her status as a celebrity of sorts and an incarcerated transgender woman presents continuing difficulties for the military. During the day, Ms. Manning, who was an Army intelligence analyst known as Bradley Manning when she disclosed archives of secret military and diplomatic files to WikiLeaks in 2010, builds picture frames and furniture in the prison wood shop. In the evenings, before the 10:05 p. m. lockdown, she reads through streams of letters, including from antisecrecy enthusiasts who view her as a  . “I am always busy. I have a backlog of things to do: legal, administrative, press inquiries, and writing  —   lots of writing,” Ms. Manning wrote in response to questions submitted by The Times because the Army does not permit her to speak directly to journalists. “Being me is a   job. ” But Ms. Manning, who is struggling to transition to life as a woman while enduring a bleak existence at a male military prison, has asked President Obama to commute the remainder of her sentence before he leaves office next week. She poses particular challenges as a prisoner, with a volunteer support network that helps bring global attention to her treatment, fragile mental state  —   she twice tried to commit suicide in 2016  —   and need for treatment that the military has no experience providing. Her request comes as the world is again focused on WikiLeaks and its founder, Julian Assange, whom her leaks made famous. The organization last year published Clinton campaign emails, obtained in a hacking, as part of what American intelligence officials claim was a covert Russian operation aimed at tilting the election to   Donald J. Trump. (Ms. Manning declined to discuss WikiLeaks, saying only that her decision to send documents to it “was neither an endorsement nor an affiliation. ”) It also comes at a time of flux in the military’s policies on gender identity. Last June, the Obama administration rescinded a ban on transgender people serving in the military and began overhauling its practices, which eventually would include providing gender reassignment surgery. But Mr. Trump has derided the lifting of the ban as “politically correct,” raising the possibility that his administration may roll back the changes. The White House declined to comment on Ms. Manning’s commutation request. The Army declined to comment about her situation at Fort Leavenworth, citing privacy laws. A military prosecutor had called Ms. Manning a “traitor” at her 2013   and officials have said the disclosures disrupted government operations and put people at risk, although prosecutors did not claim anyone was killed because of them. In a statement accompanying her petition asking Mr. Obama to reduce her sentence to the nearly seven years she already has served, Ms. Manning, now 29, said she never intended to hurt anyone and pleaded for a chance to start her life over. “I need help,” she wrote. “I am living through a cycle of anxiety, anger, hopelessness, loss, and depression. I cannot focus. I cannot sleep. I attempted to take my own life. ” On Aug. 22, 2013, the day after her sentencing for sending documents to WikiLeaks, Ms. Manning’s lawyer read a statement on the “Today” show announcing that she was female, wanted to be called “Chelsea” rather than “Bradley” and would seek   hormone therapy. To observers of her   this was no surprise. Her motivation for leaking hundreds of thousands of files she had copied from a classified computer network while serving in Iraq, as she wrote at the time, was hope that they would spark “worldwide discussion, debates, and reforms. ” But at her trial, she apologized and noted that she was “dealing with a lot of issues” when she had made that decision. Testimony showed that she had been in a mental and emotional crisis as she came to grips, in the stress of a war zone, with the fact that she was not merely gay, as she had believed while growing up in Oklahoma, but had gender dysphoria  —   a disconnect between one’s gender identity and sex assigned at birth. In the months before her leaks and May 2010 arrest, she had been behaving erratically and emailed a picture of herself wearing a woman’s wig to her supervisor. The military sent Ms. Manning to serve out her sentence as a   inmate at the Fort Leavenworth Disciplinary Barracks, its main prison for male inmates. Court documents show that Ms. Manning has had counseling sessions with a prison psychologist, Dr. Ellen Galloway, at least once a week, and military authorities have over time allowed her access to some treatments doctors prescribed for her gender dysphoria, in part because of pressure from a lawsuit filed by Chase Strangio, a lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union, in September 2014. She can now wear female prison undergarments, including a sports bra, and “subdued cosmetics. ” In early 2015, she was permitted to get speech therapy to feminize the tone and pitch of her voice and began   hormone therapy prescribed, Mr. Strangio said, by an endocrinologist brought in from the military’s Walter Reed hospital. Since then, Ms. Manning wrote, she has developed breasts and curvier hips. “There have been significant changes since I’ve been taking the hormones, and I am happy with them,” she said. But, citing security risks, the military rejected the recommendation of an outside psychologist who said she should be permitted to further feminize her appearance by growing her hair longer than male military standards. Mr. Strangio is helping her challenge that restriction. “Plaintiff feels like a freak and a weirdo  —   not because having short hair makes a person less of a woman  —   but because for her, it undermines specifically recommended treatment and sends the message to everyone that she is not a ‘real’ woman,” he wrote in a court filing. “She is getting hormones, but it sounds like the inability to socially transition, or to have surgery, could be contributing to suicidality  —   especially when she is looking at decades in prison and thus a certain hopelessness about whether that might ever be available for her,” said Dan Karasic, a University of California, San Francisco psychiatrist and the chairman of the American Psychiatric Association’s work group on gender dysphoria he cautioned that he had not examined her. The military turned down a request by The New York Times to visit the facility. But an Army spokesman, Wayne Hall, provided written answers from the Army Corrections Command to questions posed by The Times, from which a sketch of her environment emerged. Ms. Manning’s cell, like others at Fort Leavenworth, contains a bed, toilet, sink, locker, storage bin, chair and desk, according to the Army. She showers in a nearby communal bathroom with individual stalls. She has no access to the internet, but says she receives “at least a couple hundred pieces of mail every week. ” The Army does not permit her to see people who did not know her before her incarceration, so she is not allowed to meet with a handful of volunteers who have formed an informal network of supporters, but she calls one of them daily. A volunteer who relayed questions from The Times to her asked not to be named, citing security concerns. Ms. Manning said she recently finished reading “Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies,” a book about artificial intelligence by the Swedish philosopher Nick Bostrom, and “1Q84,” a dystopian novel by Haruki Murakami. She is interested in efforts to develop stronger encryption and has been “going through” the “Princeton Companion to Mathematics. ” She also said she reads women’s athletic, fashion and lifestyle magazines like Shape, Vogue, Vanity Fair and Cosmopolitan. Her cell door has a window looking onto a central “day room” with tables, chairs, pay phones and televisions. For a time, Ms. Manning played Dungeons  Dragons with a few fellow inmates, but she said she had had no time in recent months. She eats meals with other inmates in a dining facility and works on a team at the wood shop. The roughly 424 inmates held at Fort Leavenworth with Ms. Manning include men accused of routine crimes as well as some who drew public attention, including Nidal Hasan, convicted in a 2009 mass shooting at Fort Hood and held on the prison’s death row wing, and Robert Bales, who murdered 16 Afghans in Kandahar and was sentenced to life without parole in August 2013. Ms. Manning declined to say much about the guards or fellow inmates, other than to say that they have never bullied or attacked her. “It’s best to keep to yourself and try not to get involved in any drama,” she wrote. “It’s a little harder for me to keep to myself, since the staff is constantly watching me and those that interact with me. But I’m used to it by now. I don’t feel threatened by the other prisoners. I have friends. ” Her special status at Fort Leavenworth is evident. Nancy Hollander, one of the lawyers working on the appeal of her conviction and sentence, said the Army built a special secure information facility in a windowless basement room so she could meet with them and discuss   documents she leaked. While Ms. Manning said she could not say on her monitored phone calls “anything critical of the prison or the current administration or I can get charged for violation of a lawful general order,” her supporters pay close attention to her treatment. Scrutiny of the military’s struggles to deal with Ms. Manning go back to her confinement at the Quantico, Va. brig after her arrest, when she was held for months in isolation, shackled during exercise and sometimes stripped of clothing and glasses to prevent her from harming herself  —   even after a prison psychologist said such steps were unnecessary. A military judge ruled that the treatment had been illegal. At Leavenworth, after a minor disagreement with a guard in 2015, officials punished her, among other things, for “medical misuse” because they found a tube of toothpaste in her cell that was past its expiration date. Her supporters publicized the incident. In September, her supporters issued a news release saying she was on a hunger strike because of an “overzealous administrative scrutiny” and lack of progress in getting more treatment. She resumed eating after five days. Mr. Strangio said an official told her she would be eligible for the same medical treatment as   transgender soldiers, suggesting she would eventually be permitted to proceed with surgery. But months have passed, and Ms. Manning wrote that she has not seen a surgeon. Later in September, a prison board disciplined Ms. Manning for the disruption a July suicide attempt had caused. The punishment: solitary confinement. While in isolation in October, she tried again to kill herself  —   by choking herself on a piece of clothing, according to a support network member  —   before guards intervened. About a week further into that stint in solitary, she experienced a bizarre episode in which four people impersonating guards simulated breaking into the prison one night and pretended to kill her regular guards, filling her with fear, according to an account she filed with the army inspector general. A military official denied her account. Dr. Stuart Grassian, a specialist in the psychological effects of solitary confinement, said her description is consistent with hallucinations often experienced by unstable people placed in isolation. Now, with 28 years of her sentence to go and uncertainty over whether the Trump administration will deny her   surgery, Ms. Manning is hoping Mr. Obama will take mercy on her and free her from military prison, which goes by the acronym U. S. D. B. “I am not asking for a pardon of my conviction. I understand that the various collateral consequences of the   conviction will stay on my record forever,” she wrote in her commutation application. “I am merely asking for a first chance to live my life outside the U. S. D. B. as the person I was born to be. ”

4 - WASHINGTON  —   The document carried the title “A Roadmap to Repeal,” a concise list of Obama administration environmental regulations that a Koch   group was pressing President Trump and Congress to quickly reverse after Inauguration Day. It was a tally of rules that energy industry executives and lobbyists had waged a futile fight against for eight years, donating millions of dollars to lawmakers who vowed to help block them, filing lawsuits to try to overturn them and hiring experts to generate reports that questioned the need for them. But in a flurry of activity this past week, Congress did what Charles G. and David H. Koch  —   who own a conglomerate that sells hundreds of products, including gasoline, jet fuel and coal  —   and other industry leaders had been asking for. Using a rarely invoked law, the   Congress nullified a measure intended to curb the venting of gas wells on federal lands, and began the process of rolling back other regulations, including one enacted to limit damage that coal mines cause to streams  —   each items on the “Roadmap to Repeal. ” On Friday, with his own executive orders, Mr. Trump took up two more items on the list, including a call to rewrite major provisions of the   Act, legislation crafted by the Obama administration and passed by Congress in response to the 2008 financial meltdown. Not since the Reagan administration has Washington moved so quickly to roll back or nullify so many federal regulations, one of the clearest signs of an abrupt shift of power in a government now under   control that has flipped the script of winners and losers. “It is a big, fat victory, after all this time,” said Luke Popovich, a vice president at the National Mining Association, an industry trade group. A   alliance has now been formed among Congress, the Trump administration and industries that struggled to reverse what they saw as an    rush to regulate by the Obama administration. This new alignment of power is causing alarm among not only environmental groups but also other  —   mostly liberal  —   advocates who have spent much of the past eight years pushing for new rules to cover Wall Street banks, broadband providers, teacher preparation requirements, prepaid credit cards and even companies that sell   foods in vending machines. All of these measures, and many others, now stand a chance of being reversed, watered down or blocked. “For the last several years, whenever Congress would concoct some way to roll back a rule protecting clean air or clean water or undermine the fight against climate change, we always felt confident as we had an adult in charge at the White House,” said Michael Brune, executive director of the Sierra Club, an environmental group. “Now, what used to be a wish list of the oil and coal and gas industry has become the   list for Congress and the White House. ” For Republicans, these first moves are the easy part, made possible by a law that gives Congress the power to reverse regulations within 60 legislative days with a simple majority vote in the House and Senate. Other Republican efforts to exploit this    law  —   which until this week had been used only once to nullify a new rule  —   were thwarted five times with vetoes by President Obama since 2015. Once the   window expires, Republicans will have a harder time reversing Mr. Obama’s regulations, but will still have tools at their disposal, including cutting financing for the enforcement of rules, issuing new rules that are weaker, or negotiating with Democrats to pass new legislation. They have bold ambitions, including rescinding a rule enacted by the Obama administration that could close dozens of coal burning power plants, and another that would extend overtime pay eligibility to an estimated four million Americans. At a private meeting on Thursday hosted by the National Association of Manufacturers, a trade group, a senior White House adviser provided a plan on how the administration would handle efforts to curtail environmental regulations beyond the initial rush now underway to nullify recently adopted rules, said an energy industry executive who participated in the meeting and spoke on the condition of anonymity because details were confidential. Industry advocates and their allies in Congress said the   moves toward deregulation was good for consumers and the economy, as they simply wanted to eliminate measures that they believed cost jobs and drove up prices. Among the regulations being targeted: the methane rule, an Interior Department measure meant to reduce   flaring, when gas leaking from wells is burned off like a giant blow torch. “Even on the way out the door, the former administration’s regulatory onslaught continued as they pushed through more midnight regulations,” the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, said on Wednesday, as he urged his colleagues to reverse the coal mining regulation, known as the Stream Buffer Rule. “Fortunately, with a new president, we now have the opportunity to give the American people relief and our economy a boost. ” Lobbyists for the   extraction industry  —   oil, gas, coal and other mining operations  —   said they were as surprised as anyone else by the outcome of the November election, which gave them new clout in Washington. “A lot of us folks just did not anticipate we were going to be doing this,” said Stephen Brown, a lobbyist at Tesoro, an oil refining and marketing company based in San Antonio. “It was like the dog that caught up with the UPS truck. ” Within days of the election, conference calls and meetings between industry lobbyists, members of Mr. Trump’s transition teams and key Republican staff members on Capitol Hill were taking place. Those who took part began to plot out which regulations they wanted to go after first, participants in the process said. Energy rules quickly ended up at the top of the list. Mr. Obama was unusually aggressive in using his regulatory powers to expand the reach of the federal government over the energy industry, after failing to win the support he needed in Congress to pass legislation to take similar steps. But the energy industry spends about $300 million a year lobbying Congress, deploying an army of three lobbyists for each member. It also contributed more than $160 million during the most recent election cycle to federal candidates, with 80 percent of that going to Republicans, according to a tally by the Center for Responsive Politics, a nonprofit group. And the industry now wanted congressional leaders like Mr. McConnell, who is from one of the country’s top   states, to nullify the Obama administration’s new rules. “This has been a   press to block these rules, from a legal standpoint, a policy standpoint and a political standpoint,” said Bret Sumner, an oil and gas industry lawyer, who serves on the board of the Western Energy Alliance, a trade group that has aggressively lobbied Congress to block Obama administration regulations governing drilling on federal lands. Mr. Sumner’s group, along with the American Petroleum Institute and other major industry trade associations and individual companies and the U. S. Chamber of Commerce, all pressed congressional leaders to immediately repeal the methane rule, which the Interior Department finalized in November. The measure, according to the department, would force companies to prevent the release of gas via flaring or leaks, eliminating an estimated 180, 000 tons a year of methane gas, a contributing factor in climate change, while also increasing federal revenue by as much as $10 million a year, as the energy companies pay royalties only on fuel they contain and then sell. For its part, the coal industry pushed Congress to reverse the Stream Buffer Rule, also drafted by the Interior Department, that prevented mining companies from cutting off mountaintops in search of coal and other commodities, then dumping the remaining debris into nearby valleys. The department predicted the rule would protect 6, 000 miles of streams and an estimated 52, 000 acres of forests over the coming two decades. “It did not take a big pitch,” said Hal Quinn, president of the National Mining Association, of his group’s lobbying effort targeting congressional leaders to get its measure on the repeal list. “We clearly reinforced the fact this is ripe and due for Congress to reassert its power. ” A third rule targeted for quick repeal was one adopted by the Securities and Exchange Commission that required oil, gas and mining companies to disclose payments made to foreign governments for development rights  —   a provision intended to prevent corruption in places like Africa and Latin America. Billions of dollars from such payments have disappeared over the past several decades, at times siphoned by government officials for their personal use, instead of being used to improve the standard of living in these often impoverished nations. Exxon Mobil, whose former chief executive, Rex Tillerson, just became secretary of state, was one of the provision’s primary opponents. He argued that the rule would force the company to disclose “commercially sensitive information” and make it harder to compete against certain foreign oil companies that do not need to comply. By Friday, both the House and Senate had approved the first two of these repeals  —   on the stream rule and the foreign government payments  —   and final action by the Senate approving the repeal of the methane gas rule is expected soon. Mr. Trump has already put out a memo welcoming the rule reversals by Congress. “The administration strongly supports the actions taken by the House to begin to nullify unnecessary regulations imposed on America’s businesses,” said a statement issued by the White House on Wednesday. The push to repeal these rules has created moments of obvious frustration for Democrats on the floor of the House and Senate chambers. As the blitz began this past week, Democratic lawmakers used various props  —   like   photographs of fish harmed by mining industry practices  —   to try to make their points. Senator Ed Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, arrived on the chamber floor with a mock “Wheel of Fortune” board, with slivers marked “coal,” “mining” and “even more oil” indicating the available prizes that Congress was offering. “Let’s consult our wheel to see who is the big winner of the G. O. P. giveaway this week,” Mr. Markey said, essentially conceding that Senate Democrats were all but certain to lose many of these fights. But for Freedom Partners  —   the secretive club of hugely wealthy political donors led and organized by the Koch brothers  —   it was a week to celebrate, as there had been a great deal of progress on their “Roadmap to Repeal” list. James Davis, an executive vice president at the group, sent a message late on Friday declaring “these repeal bills will soon be on their way to President Trump for his signature. ”



########################################################################################################################

5 - WASHINGTON  —   President Obama’s advisers wrestled with an intractable problem in the spring and summer of 2015: How could they stabilize Afghanistan while preserving Mr. Obama’s longtime goal of pulling out the last American troops before he left office? As it happened, the president solved the problem for them. In early August of that year, when Mr. Obama convened a meeting of the National Security Council, he looked around the table and acknowledged a stark new reality. “The fever in this room has finally broken,” the president told the group, according to a person in the meeting. “We’re no longer in   mode. ” What Mr. Obama meant was that no one in the Situation Room that day, himself included, thought that the United States  —   after 14 years of war, billions of dollars spent and more than 2, 000 American lives lost  —   would ever transform Afghanistan into a semblance of a democracy able to defend itself. At the same time, he added, “the counterterrorism challenges are real. ” As bleak as Afghanistan’s prospects were, the United States could not afford to walk away and allow the country to become a seedbed for extremists again. A few weeks later, the president halted the withdrawal and announced that he would leave thousands of American troops in the country indefinitely. It was a crucial turning point in the evolution of Barack Obama. The antiwar candidate of 2008 who had pledged to turn around Afghanistan  —   the “good war” to George W. Bush’s “bad war” in Iraq  —   had conceded that the longest military operation in American history would not end on his watch. The optimistic president who once thought Afghanistan was winnable had, through bitter experience, become the commander in chief of a forever war. He remains defensive about the lessons of that journey. “We shouldn’t assume that every time a country has problems that it reflects a failure of American policy,” the president said in an interview in September. Now, as Mr. Obama prepares to turn the war over to Donald J. Trump, a leader even more skeptical than he is about the value of American engagement in foreign conflicts, Afghanistan captures the disillusionment of a man who believed, as he put it in his 2009 Nobel Peace Prize acceptance speech, “that war is sometimes necessary, and war at some level is an expression of human folly. ” More than any other conflict, Afghanistan shaped Mr. Obama’s thinking on the basic questions of war, peace and the use of military power. It is where he discovered his affinity for drones, sharpened his belief in the limits of American intervention, battled his generals and hardened his disdain for unreliable foreign leaders. It reaffirmed his suspicions about sending American troops into foreign conflicts and made him reluctant to use more force in Iraq, Syria, Libya and other war zones. It also chastened him about his own hopes. “When it comes to helping these societies stabilize and create a more secure environment and a better life for their people, we have to understand,” he said in the interview, “that this is a long slog. ” Mr. Obama was a state senator from Illinois in October 2002 when he famously condemned Iraq as a “dumb war. ” But in the same speech he also said, “I don’t oppose all wars. ” He was referring to Afghanistan, which he viewed as a just war to hunt down the perpetrators of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. “I would willingly take up arms myself to prevent such tragedy from happening again,” he told the crowd that day in Chicago’s Federal Plaza. By July 2008, as the Democratic nominee for president, Mr. Obama had embraced Afghanistan as a priority over Iraq  —   the “good war,” in a phrase that he never actually used himself but that became so associated with his approach it was sometimes wrongly attributed to him. Mr. Obama praised the Bush administration’s troop surge in Iraq that year not because he believed that the United States could transform Iraqi society, but because he thought that reducing the violence there would allow the nation to turn its attention to Afghanistan. “This is a war that we have to win,” he declared. He promised to send at least two more combat brigades, or roughly 10, 000 soldiers, to Afghanistan. The United States was hardly on course for victory. Although there were already close to 50, 000 American troops in Afghanistan as Mr. Obama campaigned that summer, the Taliban were gaining momentum. In a bloody debacle, nine American soldiers were killed in what became known as the Battle of Wanat when the Taliban brazenly overran a remote Army outpost in the far eastern province of Nuristan. Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, echoed Mr. Obama in calling the situation in the country “precarious and urgent. ” More than 100 Americans would die in Afghanistan by the end of 2008, a larger number than in any other prior year. When Mr. Obama took office in January 2009, he ordered a quick policy review on Afghanistan by a former intelligence analyst, Bruce Riedel. But even before it was completed, he accepted a Pentagon recommendation to send 17, 000 additional troops to Afghanistan, bringing the total to nearly 70, 000 American troops on the ground. By the fall of 2009, with the Taliban showing increased strength, Mr. Obama’s military commanders, backed by the elders on his war council, including Hillary Clinton, then his secretary of state, were pressing him to go much farther. They urged on him an ambitious counterinsurgency strategy that had helped turn around the war in Iraq  —   a     expensive doctrine of trying to win over the locals by building roads, bridges, schools and a   government. The strategy, known by its acronym COIN, would require as many as 40, 000 additional American men and women in uniform in Afghanistan, his advisers told him. “There was still the afterglow of the surge in Iraq, and the counterinsurgency narrative that had made the military the savior of the Iraq war,” said Vali R. Nasr, a former State Department adviser on Afghanistan and Pakistan. “I don’t believe Obama was in a position to pick a debate with the military on Afghanistan, and to assert what would be his worldview. ” “In many ways, I think, he deferred,” said Mr. Nasr, now the dean of the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies. Although Mr. Obama agreed after months of internal debate to send 30, 000 additional troops to Afghanistan, he placed a strict timetable on the mission, saying they would have to be withdrawn again, starting in July 2011. His aides later said he felt hijacked by a military that had presented him with a narrow band of options rather than a real choice. Even some former military commanders agreed, saying that the troop deployments were framed in a way that made choosing a smaller number  —   20, 000, for example  —   look like a path to certain defeat. “President Obama was asking the military for broad options,” said Karl W. Eikenberry, a retired general who served as the commander in Afghanistan from 2005 to 2007 and was later Mr. Obama’s ambassador to Kabul. But, he said, the military gave Mr. Obama only “variations” on “the more robust counterinsurgency model. ” Mr. Eikenberry, who wrote a politically explosive but prescient cable in late 2009 raising doubts about the wisdom of the surge, diagnosed a deeper problem with the policy. Was it simply to prevent Afghanistan from being a safe haven for Al Qaeda? Or was it to turn Afghanistan into another Denmark? “When he came in, everyone knew we were going to do more,” Mr. Eikenberry said. “But what we were trying to achieve was difficult to define. ” Given Mr. Obama’s innate wariness of   it didn’t take long for him to grow disenchanted with the Denmark option. A few months into the surge, in the spring of 2010, David H. Petraeus, the commander of the Pentagon’s Central Command and an architect of the strategy, was briefing him on the state of the counterinsurgency campaign. Drawing on anthropology theory from the University of Chicago, General Petraeus explained to his commander in chief how neighborhoods in Kandahar related to one another. Mr. Obama listened for a while, then cut him off. “We can’t worry about how neighborhoods relate to each other in Kandahar,” he curtly told General Petraeus, according to people in the room. “Obama believes the military can do enormous things,” said Benjamin J. Rhodes, the deputy national security adviser. “It can win wars and stabilize conflicts. But a military can’t create a political culture or build a society. ” By the end of his first term, Mr. Obama had evolved to the point that he fully embraced the concept “Afghan good enough. ” The phrase, which had been kicked around the White House since 2010, referred to the shift away from   to a policy that was content with taking out the terrorists, preventing the Taliban from overrunning the country and putting a premium on getting the troops out. By that new standard, things had improved in Afghanistan. By August 2010, 100, 000 American troops were on the ground in Afghanistan and were pushing back the Taliban in some critical areas. Despite uneven progress in the military campaign, Ryan Crocker, a diplomat who had reopened the American Embassy in Kabul in 2002 and served there again as ambassador in 2011, recalled thinking, “Wow, this place looks great!” The Navy SEAL raid that killed Osama bin Laden in Pakistan in May 2011 added to Mr. Obama’s conviction that he was on the way to closing the books on the war. At midnight on May 1, 2012, Air Force One rolled out from behind a hangar at Joint Base Andrews to pick up the president for a secret trip to Afghanistan. He was going to sign a strategic partnership agreement with President Hamid Karzai that set the terms for relations after 2014, when the United States was scheduled to withdraw its combat troops and turn over Afghanistan’s security to the Afghans. Aides to Mr. Obama had advised him not to go for security reasons, but he saw it as an important milestone. The agreement promised an “enduring partnership” between the United States and Afghanistan, with pledges of American help in developing the Afghan economy and public institutions. Yet the promises obscured a starker reality: Mr. Obama had accelerated the timetable for drawing down American troops, and he was looking beyond the war. Speaking to a national TV audience from Bagram Air Base, he suggested that America’s experience in Afghanistan had come full circle. “One year ago, from a base here in Afghanistan, our troops launched the operation that killed Osama bin Laden,” he said. “The goal I set  —   to defeat Al Qaeda, and deny it a chance to rebuild  —   is now within our reach. ” Earlier, Mr. Obama had met for an hour with Mr. Karzai. The two had long had a rocky relationship  —   on an earlier trip, Mr. Obama excoriated Mr. Karzai for the rampant corruption in the Afghan government  —   and this session did little to improve their rapport. Mr. Crocker recalled that the president was “very aloof, almost cold, which bothered me a bit because I’d worked a solid damn year to get Karzai in a better place with us. ” Things never warmed up between them. When Mr. Karzai refused to sign a   security agreement with Washington, Mr. Obama gave up on him to focus on his successor, Ashraf Ghani. The experience left a lasting imprint on the president, his aides said. He concluded that without the right partner, it was impossible for the United States to succeed, no matter how much blood and treasure it poured into a country. It was an insight that Mr. Obama applied to his relations with other countries, from Pakistan to Israel, where his poor relationships with the leaders impeded progress. “The most underappreciated part of foreign policy,” Mr. Rhodes said, “is dealing with flawed partners. ” When Mr. Obama convened his National Security Council that day in August 2015, the Taliban were regrouping again. They had carried out audacious terrorist attacks in the center of Kabul and had mounted a military offensive in the provinces of Kunduz and Oruzgan. Worse, there was a new threat in the form of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, which sprouted in the poisonous soil of Iraq after the United States left and was finding recruits in the Hindu Kush. Mr. Obama had rejected a chorus of calls in Washington to delay the drawdown, under which the residual force of American troops was to leave Afghanistan by the end of 2016. “The mantra I heard was that the president does not want to hand off to his successor the mess he inherited,” said Daniel F. Feldman, who served as the special representative to Afghanistan and Pakistan in 2014 and 2015. But as the Islamic State became a dire enough threat to return American troops to Iraq, Mr. Obama felt compelled to change course on Afghanistan. “ISIL thrived in a vacuum in Iraq and it pointed to a similar vacuum in Afghanistan,” Mr. Rhodes said. Mr. Obama, he said, was prodded by more than fear. After a long stretch of political paralysis, Afghanistan formed a government with Mr. Ghani in the presidency. For the first time since taking office, Mr. Obama felt like he had a partner with whom he could do business. The   Afghan Army was taking heavy casualties fighting the Taliban, and the president believed that the United States had an obligation to help them. But as Mr. Obama’s war council met that August morning, the level of American support remained the subject of intense debate. Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. a skeptic about Afghanistan going back to 2009, argued that the country would revert to chaos, regardless of how long the United States stayed there. “It doesn’t matter if we leave tomorrow or 10 years from now,” he declared, according to those in the room. He was, he conceded, a “broken record” on this issue. Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, who had succeeded Admiral Mullen as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, recommended that the United States maintain a military presence in Kabul, and at Bagram and a scattering of bases in the east and south. The 10, 000 soldiers in the country would carry out a singular, ruthless mission of killing suspected terrorists and keeping the country from spiraling out of control. The imperative, General Dempsey told Mr. Obama, was that Afghanistan fit into a broader counterterrorism policy from Central Asia to North Africa to extend “well beyond your presidency,” according to several officials. Mr. Obama liked that idea. It was in line, he said, with the principles he had laid out in a 2014 speech at the United States Military Academy in West Point, N. Y. where he said America would train and equip foreign armies but leave the   fighting to them. He acknowledged that it would mean handing off Afghanistan to his successor as unfinished business. “This goes to the politics of what I’m leaving for the next president,” he told the group, according to one of the participants. “My interest is not to sign them up for 10 years of X,” he added, referring to troop numbers, “but to lay out a vision and to put stakes in the ground for that vision. ” Mr. Obama now seems at an uneasy peace. In the interview in September, he disputed the suggestion that his policy had failed. He had, after all, reduced the number of American troops to fewer than 10, 000 from more than 100, 000. They were training and assisting Afghan troops, even if the line between that and actual combat was sometimes blurry. The country had been broken to begin with, he said, and America was never going to fix it. “Afghanistan was one of the poorest countries in the world with the lowest literacy rates in the world before we got there. It continues to be,” Mr. Obama said. The country “was riven with all kinds of ethnic and tribal divisions before we got there. It’s still there. ” In the end, Afghanistan became the template for a new kind of warfare  —   a chronic conflict, across an arc of unstable states, in which the United States is a participant, if not the principal actor. At a NATO summit meeting in Warsaw in July, Mr. Obama acknowledged that this prospect would disappoint an American public still suffering from combat fatigue. “It’s very hard for us ever to get the satisfaction of MacArthur and the emperor meeting, and a war being officially over,” he said. “As commander in chief of the most powerful military in the world,” he went on, “I spend a lot of time brooding over these issues. And I’m not satisfied we’ve got it perfect yet. ”

5 - DETROIT  —   A low buzz fills the air as an army of mortgage bankers, perched below floating canopies in a kaleidoscope of vivid pinks, blues, purples and greens, works the phones, promising borrowers easy financing and low rates for home loans. By the elevators, nobody blinks when an employee wearing a pink tutu bustles past. On any given day, a company mascot, Simon, a bespectacled mouse, goes on the hunt for “gouda,” or good ideas, from the work force. A visit to the headquarters of Quicken Loans in downtown Detroit may seem like a trip to a place where “Glengarry Glen Ross” meets Seussville. But the whimsical, irreverent atmosphere sits atop a   business in a field  —   the selling of the American dream  —   that has changed drastically since an earlier generation of mortgage lenders propelled the economy to near collapse in 2008 by issuing risky and even fraudulent loans. In the years since the crisis, many of the nation’s largest banks pulled back their   activities. Quicken Loans pushed in. Today, it is the   retail mortgage lender, originating $96 billion in mortgages last year  —   an eightfold increase from 2008. Privately held Quicken, like some of America’s largest banks before it, has also landed in regulators’ cross hairs. In a federal   lawsuit filed in 2015, the Department of Justice charged that, among other things, the company misrepresented borrowers’ income or credit scores, or inflated appraisals, in order to qualify for Federal Housing Administration insurance. As a result, when those loans soured, the government says that taxpayers  —   not Quicken loans  —   suffered millions of dollars in losses. Quicken Loans today is the F. H. A. insurance program’s largest participant. Executives at Quicken Loans deny the charges, maintaining, among other things, that the government “ ” a small number of examples to build its case. In an aggressive move, the company   sued the Department of Justice, demanding a blanket ruling that all of the loans it had originated met requirements and “pose no undue risks to the F. H. A. insurance fund. ” Quicken’s suit was dismissed. But it reflects the    style of Quicken Loans’ founder and chairman, Dan Gilbert, the billionaire who once publicly excoriated the N. B. A. superstar LeBron James for leaving the Cleveland Cavaliers, in which Mr. Gilbert has a majority stake. He also owns significant chunks of central Detroit, where Quicken Loans is based. Mr. Gilbert, who founded the company in 1985, sold it to the business software company Intuit in 1999, before buying it back with other investors in 2002. He is working to rectify the city’s downtrodden image with streetcars, upscale cafes and boutiques, and   data, making him a hometown hero. Late last year, Quicken Loans won a motion to move the Department of Justice case to a federal courthouse roughly three blocks from its Detroit headquarters. Sitting on the edge of a chair in his office, the Motor City’s skyline a steel gray in the   November sun, Mr. Gilbert said that his company has been unfairly targeted. “You want to know what this case is about?” he said. “Somebody probably put up a whiteboard and said, ‘Here are the 10 largest F. H. A. lenders, now go and collect settlements from them, regardless of whether they did anything wrong. ’” In court documents, Quicken argues it has the lowest default rates in the F. H. A. program. It projects the government will reap $5. 7 billion in net profits from the insurance premiums for loans made from 2007 to 2013, after paying out any claims. A spokesman for the Department of Housing and Urban Development, which is home to the F. H. A. program at the center of the case against Quicken, declined to speak about the lawsuit. Late last year, Donald J. Trump named a former Quicken Loans lobbyist, Shawn Krause, to his H. U. D. transition team. A Trump spokeswoman did not respond to an email asking about potential conflicts of interest. In an emailed statement, Quicken Loans said the fact that Ms. Krause had come from the largest F. H. A. lender in the country “bodes well for the positive impact she has, and will, make on H. U. D. ” In the years since the financial crisis, Quicken has emerged as a leader in the nation’s   system, a network of nonbank financial institutions that has gained significant ground against its more heavily regulated bank counterparts in providing home loans to Americans. Increased regulation and decreased profits sent the nation’s banks packing. Nonbanks, like Quicken, have filled that gap. Today, Quicken is the nation’s   retail residential mortgage lender, behind Wells Fargo, but ahead of banking giants like J. P. Morgan, Bank of America and Citigroup, according to Mortgage Daily. Considered by many to be a visionary leader, Mr. Gilbert often strikes a pugnacious stance. When Mr. James, the N. B. A. star, announced he was leaving the Cleveland Cavaliers in 2010 to join the Miami Heat, Mr. Gilbert  —   who not only has a majority stake in the Cavaliers, but also operates Quicken Loans Arena, where they play  —   penned a public tirade against the “cowardly betrayal,” in a letter written in the typeface Comic Sans. Mr. James is again playing for the Cavaliers. A call to his agent seeking comment was not returned. The year before, Mr. Gilbert got into an altercation at a bar mitzvah, punching a former colleague, David Hall, in the head before he was escorted out by security, according to interviews conducted by the Birmingham Police Department in Michigan. In police documents, Mr. Gilbert’s lawyer said Mr. Hall filed the complaint in order to pressure Mr. Gilbert into paying $2 million to buy out Mr. Hall’s investments in Mr. Gilbert’s companies. The Birmingham city attorney ultimately denied a warrant in the case on the grounds that the charges were not “supported by probable cause. ” Mr. Hall did not return an email seeking comment. In an email statement, a Quicken Loans spokesman said Mr. Gilbert “defended himself in a minor confrontation that was instigated by a former employee who was the aggressor. ” On a more trifling scale, after sending text messages about this article to a reporter at The New York Times but not receiving a response  —   Mr. Gilbert was texting her landline number by accident  —   he followed up with an email accusing the reporter of disconnecting her mobile phone to avoid him. The phone “likely is one of your temporary numbers that you deploy for the surreptitious work that you do,” he wrote. When alerted to the misunderstanding, Mr. Gilbert apologized “for any of it that was caused on my end. ” When Mr. Gilbert was asked in an email if he “often strikes a ‘combative stance’ or ‘frequently attacks his critics,’” a Quicken Loans spokesman responded in an email, “It’s interesting that when someone with as long and successful career as Mr. Gilbert is forced to defend his integrity and honor from old   insignificant already rehashed incidents and accusations from a media source as credible as The NY Times, you would imply that doing such is ‘frequently attacking’ his critics. ” These days, Mr. Gilbert appears to be itching for a fight with the Justice Department. In court filings, Quicken argued that the   government investigation was based on 55 “ ” loans out of nearly 250, 000. Quicken also argued that a longstanding F. H. A. process to resolve loans that did not meet its requirements, through either the repurchase of the loan or by indemnifying F. H. A. from any losses, was retroactively discontinued for Quicken. Since 2011, Mr. Gilbert has spent more than $2. 2 billion on downtown Detroit, buying up 95 decrepit properties and rehabilitating them in an effort to lure new tenants. Nike opened a store there last year. The New York burger chain Shake Shack is coming in 2017, as is the sports retailer Under Armour. Mr. Gilbert also notes that he has leased space downtown to several local     businesses. That sort of presence makes downtown Detroit today seem a bit like a company town, a sort of Quickenville. That’s because Quicken Loans is just one of more than 100 closely knit companies that is owned or controlled by Mr. Gilbert with a footprint in the area. Through his commercial real estate properties, Mr. Gilbert can decide which tenants fit into his vision for downtown Detroit, and which don’t. Rocket Fiber, an idea developed by three former Quicken Loans technology employees and financially backed by Mr. Gilbert, has brought   internet to downtown Detroit. For a $15 million donation, Quicken received the naming rights for the QLine, a streetcar that is expected to start running through downtown Detroit this spring. Mr. Gilbert sits on the board of the streetcar project. Lines of bicycles in downtown Detroit are available free for all employees of Mr. Gilbert’s companies. And visitors can bet at the tables at Jack Detroit   Greektown, a gambling venture controlled by Mr. Gilbert. The Quicken Loans family also includes one of the largest title companies in the United States, an appraisal firm, a call center and   Realty, which says on its website that it is the “preferred real estate partner” of Quicken Loans. Mr. Gilbert, who was busted in college for running a football betting ring (the charges were dismissed and his record was expunged) plays on a big stage. Back in 2010, he guaranteed that the Cavaliers would win the N. B. A. championship before LeBron James would. They didn’t, but the team, led by Mr. James, did win the title last year, and this season’s team has the highest payroll in the league. With Quicken Loans, Mr. Gilbert has built a   company in the     industry. Former executives describe Quicken Loans as a technology company that sells mortgages. But the heart that keeps Quicken’s blood moving is the 3, 500 mortgage bankers who work its phones. Many new employees come in with little to no background in financial services. One employee joined after delivering pizzas to the Quicken Loans office and becoming interested in working there.   employees typically make hundreds of calls a day, trying to get potential customers on the phone. Not unlike the assembly lines that put together cars in Detroit, the call is immediately handed off to a licensed mortgage banker, who completes the loan application, then quickly passes it to processing so that he or she can focus on the next loan application. Mr. Gilbert said clients are able to close more quickly on loans when specialists focus on each stage of the loan process. He and other Quicken executives note that the company has repeatedly made Fortune magazine’s list of Best Places to Work For and has earned top marks in J. D. Power client satisfaction surveys. Quicken defines its culture and philosophy through a number of   “isms,” created and curated over the years by Mr. Gilbert: “Yes before no. ” “A penny saved is a penny. ” “We eat our own dog food. ” At the same time, several former employees and executives in interviews described a demanding work environment, with staff members expected to work long hours and weekends to hit targets. In recent years, Quicken and its affiliated companies have faced at least four lawsuits filed by former mortgage bankers seeking overtime. Quicken won one of the overtime cases, but court documents indicate others were directed into settlement negotiations. An email to the various plaintiffs’ lawyers was not returned. And in early 2016, a National Labor Relations Board judge ruled that Quicken and five of its related companies issued an employee handbook with rules that violated workers’ right to engage in various activities, including   ones. Quicken has appealed the ruling, calling the policies “common, rational and sensible. ” When asked about criticisms of the work environment, Mr. Gilbert and other executives defended the company, noting that mortgage bankers work an average of 44 hours per week and are compensated well. It is possible for team members, Mr. Gilbert said, to earn over $85, 000 in their second year, more than double the median household income for Wayne County, Mich. Quicken Loans’ growing role in parts of the mortgage market may make it a lightning rod for critics. Proponents say that nonbanks like Quicken or PennyMac in California  —   which was started by former executives of Countrywide, the mortgage machine in Southern California that was a hotbed of toxic mortgages in the 2008 crisis  —   are filling an important void. They argue that they serve people with low to moderate incomes or lower credit scores whom the big banks shun. The big banks, they say, focus instead on   jumbo mortgages, or mortgages of more than $424, 100, the maximum amount that can be backed by   enterprises like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. “The large banks want to go after the   business,” said Guy D. Cecala, the chief executive and publisher of Inside Mortgage Finance. Thanks to low interest rates, home sales are booming and the mortgage market was expected to top $2 trillion in originations in 2016. That’s a far cry from the frothy height of $3. 8 trillion that was hit in 2003. Moreover, many other parts of the mortgage machine that were in place leading up to the financial crisis have been dismantled. Still, critics say today’s shadow banks, by focusing on the riskier end of the mortgage market, may be revving up the same parts of the engine that resulted in defaults and foreclosures in the past. Nonbanks, which are typically less capitalized and may have more difficulty reimbursing the government for bad loans, now dominate F. H. A.  mortgage loans, according to data from the American Enterprise Institute’s International Center on Housing Risk. In September 2012, banks originated 65 percent of the   loans insured by the F. H. A. according to the data. Today, that number has more than flipped: Nonbanks originate 73 percent of the loans, with banks’ share dropping to 18 percent. The figures are more spectacular for refinanced mortgages, where nonbanks now make up 93 percent of loans. “The market has moved to the nonbanks because the nonbanks’ appetite for risk is much higher,” said Edward J. Pinto, a director of the Center on Housing Risk. He has argued that the F. H. A. is not only failing to help   communities with its programs, but is actually weakening them with imprudent loans. Mr. Gilbert disputed any “false narrative” that claims Quicken faces less regulatory scrutiny, is lightly capitalized or makes risky loans. He said that the average credit score of a Quicken borrower is one of the highest in the nation that the parent company’s assets “are larger than that of 93 percent of all F. D. I. C.  depositories” and that the company is regulated by 50 states, multiple municipalities and numerous federal agencies. Quicken Loans is privately held, and it is unclear what its assets are worth. In an email response to   questions, Mr. Gilbert added, “Quicken Loans underwriting and production is one of the highest, if not the highest, quality production in the entire country. ”



########################################################################################################################

6 - Joachim Neander was a   Calvinist theologian who often hiked through a valley outside Düsseldorf, Germany, writing hymns. Neander understood everything around him as a manifestation of the Lord’s will and work. There was no room in his worldview for randomness, only purpose and praise. “See how God this rolling   with beauty as a robe,” one of his verses goes. “Forests, fields, and living   its Master’s glory sings. ” He wrote dozens of hymns like this  —     and  . Then he caught tuberculosis and died at 30. Almost two centuries later, in the summer of 1856, workers quarrying limestone in that valley dug up an unusual skull. It was elongated and almost chinless, and the fossilized bones found alongside it were extra thick and fit together oddly. This was three years before Darwin published “The Origin of Species. ” The science of human origins was not a science the assumption was that our ancestors had always looked like us, all the way back to Adam. (Even distinguishing fossils from ordinary rock was beyond the grasp of many scientists. One popular method involved licking them if the material had animal matter in it, it stuck to your tongue.) And so, as anomalous as these German bones seemed, most scholars had no trouble finding satisfying explanations. A leading theory held that this was the skeleton of a lost, bowlegged Cossack with rickets. The peculiar bony ridge over the man’s eyes was a result of the poor Cossack’s perpetually furrowing his brow in pain  —   because of the rickets. One British geologist, William King, suspected something more radical. Instead of being the remains of an atypical human, they might have belonged to a typical member of an alternate humanity. In 1864, he published a paper introducing it as such  —   an extinct human species, the first ever discovered. King named this species after the valley where it was found, which itself had been named for the ecstatic poet who once wandered it. He called it Homo neanderthalensis: Neanderthal Man. Who was Neanderthal Man? King felt obligated to describe him. But with no established techniques for interpreting archaeological material like the skull, he fell back on racism and phrenology. He focused on the peculiarities of the Neanderthal’s skull, including the “enormously projecting brow. ” No living humans had skeletal features remotely like these, but King was under the impression that the skulls of contemporary African and Australian aboriginals resembled the Neanderthals’ more than “ordinary”   skulls. So extrapolating from his low opinion of what he called these “savage” races, he explained that the Neanderthal’s skull alone was proof of its moral “darkness” and stupidity. “The thoughts and desires which once dwelt within it never soared beyond those of a brute,” he wrote. Other scientists piled on. So did the popular press. We knew almost nothing about Neanderthals, but already we assumed they were ogres and losers. The genesis of this idea, the historian Paige Madison notes, largely comes down to flukes of “timing and luck. ” While King was working, another British scientist, George Busk, had the same suspicions about the Neander skull. He had received a comparable one, too, from the tiny British territory of Gibraltar. The Gibraltar skull was dug up long before the Neander Valley specimen surfaced, but local hobbyists simply labeled it “human skull” and forgot about it for the next 16 years. Its brow ridge wasn’t as prominent as the Neander skull’s, and its features were less imposing it was a woman’s skull, it turns out. Busk dashed off a quick report but stopped short of naming the new creature. He hoped to study additional fossils and learn more. Privately, he considered calling it Homo calpicus, or Gibraltar Man. So, what if Busk  —   “a conscientious naturalist too cautious to make premature claims,” as Madison describes him  —   had beaten King to publication? Consider how different our first impressions of a Gibraltar Woman might have been from those of Neanderthal Man: what feelings of sympathy, or even kinship, this other skull might have stirred. There is a worldview, the opposite of Joachim Neander’s, that sees our planet as a product of only tumult and indifference. In such a world, it’s possible for an entire species to be ground into extinction by forces beyond its control and then, 40, 000 years later, be dug up and made to endure an additional century and a half of bad luck and abuse. That’s what happened to the Neanderthals. And it’s what we did to them. But recently, after we’d snickered over their skulls for so long, it stopped being clear who the boneheads were. I’ll start with a confession, an embarrassing but relevant one, because I would come to see our history with Neanderthals as continually distorted by an unfortunate human tendency to believe in ideas that are, in reality, incorrect  —   and then to leverage that conviction into a feeling of superiority over other people. And in retrospect, I realize I demonstrated that same tendency myself at the beginning of this project. Because I don’t want to come off as   or as pointing fingers, here goes: Before traveling to Gibraltar last summer, I had no idea what Gibraltar was. Or rather, I was sure I knew what Gibraltar was, but I was wrong. I thought it was just that famous Rock  —   an unpopulated hunk of   geology, which, if I’m being honest, I recognized mostly from the Prudential logo: that limestone protuberance at the mouth of the Mediterranean, that elephantine white molar jutting into the sky. True, I was traveling to Gibraltar on short notice when I   the director of the Gibraltar Museum, Clive Finlayson, he told me the museum happened to be starting its annual excavation of a Neanderthal cave there the following week and invited me to join. Still, even a couple of days before I left, when a friend told me she faintly remembered spending an afternoon in Gibraltar once as a teenager, I gently mansplained to her that I was pretty sure she was mistaken: Gibraltar, I told her, wasn’t somewhere you could just go. In my mind, I had privileged access. I pictured myself and Finlayson taking a special little boat. In fact, Gibraltar is a peninsula connected to Spain. It’s a lively British overseas territory, with 30, 000 citizens living in a city on its western side  —   a city with bakeries and clothing stores and tourists buying all the usual kitsch. Some unusual kitsch, too  —   like a laminated child’s place mat I spotted that, in a typical tourist destination, might say something unexceptional like SOMEONE WHO LOVES ME WENT TO GIBRALTAR, but here read WE SHALL NEVER SURRENDER! BRITISH FOREVER! The history of Gibraltar, given its strategic location, is a grinding saga of military sieges and ruthlessly contested changes in ownership. The residue of that strife, today, is a pronounced British patriotism and a   exchange of slights with Spain, which still disputes Britain’s claim to the territory. After Queen Elizabeth II’s Diamond Jubilee, in 2012, when Gibraltar projected towering images of Her Majesty on a   side of the Rock  —   “a clear act of provocation,” one reporter called it  —   Spain began inspecting vehicle after vehicle at the border, backing up the line for hours, stranding the bulk of Gibraltar’s work force, who commute in every day. The afternoon I showed up, activists from a   Spanish political party had crossed into Gibraltar and hung an enormous Spanish flag high up on the Rock. This wasn’t just mischief. It was regarded as an act of symbolic terrorism. When one of the men appeared in court two days later, I read, a woman screamed at him, “Gibraltar will never be Spanish!” She sounded like that defiant place mat come to life. I happened to arrive in Gibraltar the week of the Brexit vote. Up in England, people were thundering about the working class versus elites, sovereignty and immigration, warning that British identity was being fouled by the European project. But in Gibraltar  —   a   fully detached nib of Britain, flanked by water on two sides and Spain on the third  —   the question was less philosophical: If the United Kingdom left the European Union, Spain might seize the opportunity to isolate Gibraltar, leaving the territory to shrivel up, like a flap of dead skin. The Gibraltarian government had already called on the House of Commons for help. There was concern that Spain would jam up the border again and that it might happen right away. Around town, “Remain” signs hung everywhere. The atmosphere was edgy, as though everyone was holding hands, waiting to see whether a meteor would hit. It was like the hairline cracks between so many     and Thems seemed to be widening, and some corrosive, molten goop was seeping out: mutual dependence curdled with contempt. Clearly it was happening back home in America too. All in all, it was a good week to spend in a cave. Gorham’s Cave is on Gibraltar’s   eastern coast: a tremendous opening at the bottom of the sheer face of the Rock, shadowy and   like a cathedral. Its mouth is 200 feet across at the base and 120 feet tall. It tapers asymmetrically like a crumpled wizard’s hat. Neanderthals inhabited Gorham’s Cave on and off for 100, 000 years, as well as a second cave next to it, called Vanguard Cave. The artifacts they left behind were buried as wind pushed sand into the cave. This created a high sloping dune, composed of hundreds of distinct layers of sand, each of which was once the surface of the dune, the floor of the cave. The dune is enormous. It reaches about   of the way up Gorham’s walls, spilling out of the cave’s mouth and onto the rocky beach, like a colossal cat’s tongue lapping at the Mediterranean. Every summer, since 1989, a team of archaeologists has returned to meticulously clear that sand away and recover the material inside. “I realized a long time ago, I won’t live to see the end of this project,” Finlayson, who leads the excavation, told me. “But I think we’re in a great moment. We’re beginning to understand these people after a century of putting them down as apelike brutes. ” Neanderthals are people, too  —   a separate,   branch of our family tree. We last shared an ancestor at some point between 500, 000 and 750, 000 years ago. Then our evolutionary trajectory split. We evolved in Africa, while the Neanderthals would live in Europe and Asia for 300, 000 years. Or as little as 60, 000 years. It depends whom you ask. It always does: The study of human origins, I found, is riddled with vehement disagreements and scientists who readily dismantle the premises of even the most   questions. (In this case, the uncertainty rests, in part, on when, in this long evolutionary process, Neanderthals officially became “Neanderthals. ”) What is clearer is that roughly 40, 000 years ago, just as our own lineage expanded from Africa and took over Eurasia, the Neanderthals disappeared. Scientists have always assumed that the timing wasn’t coincidental. Maybe we used our superior intellects to outcompete the Neanderthals for resources maybe we clubbed them all to death. Whatever the mechanism of this   replacement, it seemed to imply that our kind was somehow better than their kind. We’re still here, after all, and their path ended as soon as we crossed paths. But Neanderthals weren’t the   louts we’ve imagined them to be  —   not just a bunch of Neanderthals. As a review of findings published last year put it, they were actually “very similar” to their contemporary Homo sapiens in Africa, in terms of “standard markers of modern cognitive and behavioral capacities. ” We’ve always classified Neanderthals, technically, as human  —   part of the genus Homo. But it turns out they also did the stuff that, you know, makes us human. Neanderthals buried their dead. They made jewelry and specialized tools. They made ocher and other pigments, perhaps to paint their faces or bodies  —   evidence of a “symbolically mediated worldview,” as archaeologists call it. Their tracheal anatomy suggests that they were capable of language and probably had   raspy voices, like Julia Child. They manufactured glue from birch bark, which required heating the bark to at least 644 degrees Fahrenheit  —   a feat scientists find difficult to duplicate without a ceramic container. In Gibraltar, there’s evidence that Neanderthals extracted the feathers of certain birds  —   only dark feathers  —   possibly for aesthetic or ceremonial purposes. And while Neanderthals were once presumed to be crude scavengers, we now know they exploited the different terrains on which they lived. They took down dangerous game, including an extinct species of rhinoceros. Some ate seals and other marine mammals. Some ate shellfish. Some ate chamomile. (They had regional cuisines.) They used toothpicks. Wearing feathers, eating seals  —   maybe none of this sounds particularly impressive. But it’s what our human ancestors were capable of back then too, and scientists have always considered such behavioral flexibility and complexity as signs of our specialness. When it came to Neanderthals, though, many researchers literally couldn’t see the evidence sitting in front of them. A lot of the new thinking about Neanderthals comes from revisiting material in museum collections, excavated decades ago, and   it with new technology or simply with open minds. The real surprise of these discoveries may not be the competence of Neanderthals but how obnoxiously low our expectations for them have been  —   the bias with which too many scientists approached that other Us. One archaeologist called these researchers “modern human supremacists. ” Inside Gorham’s Cave, archaeologists were excavating what they called a hearth  —   not a physical fireplace but a spot in the sand where, around 50, 000 years ago, Neanderthals lit a fire. Each summer, the Gibraltar Museum employs students from universities in England and Spain to work the dig, and now two young women  —   one from each country  —   sat   under work lights, clearing sand away with the edge of a trowel and a brush to leave a   cube. A black band of charcoal ran through it. The students worked scrupulously, watching for small animal bones or artifacts. They’d pulled out a butchered ibex mandible, a number of mollusk shells and   husks. They’d also found six chunks of fossilized hyena dung, as well as “débitage,” distinctive shards of flint left over when Neanderthals shattered larger pieces to make axes. The cube of sand would eventually be wrapped in plaster and sent for analysis. The sand the two women were sweeping into their dustpans was transferred into plastic bags and marched out of the cave, down to the beach, where other students sieved it. Smaller bones caught in the sieve were bagged and labeled. Even the sand that passed through the sieve was saved and driven back to a lab at the museum, where I would later find three other students picking through it with magnifying glasses and tweezers, searching for tinier stuff  —   rodent teeth,   spines  —   while listening to “Call Me Maybe. ” To an outsider, it looked preposterous. The archaeologists were cataloging and storing absolutely everything, treating this physical material as though it were digital information  —   JPEGs of itself. And yet they couldn’t afford not to: Everything a Neanderthal came into contact with was a valuable clue. (In 28 years of excavations here, archaeologists have yet to find a fossil of an actual Neanderthal.) “This is like putting together a   jigsaw puzzle where you only have five pieces,” Finlayson said. He somehow made this analogy sound exciting instead of hopeless. By that point, the enormousness of what they didn’t know  —   what they could never know  —   had become a distraction for me. One of the dig’s lead archaeologists, Richard Jennings of Liverpool John Moores University, listed the many items they had found around that hearth. “And this is literally just from two squares!” he said. (A “square,” in archaeology, is one meter by one meter sites are divided into grids of squares.) Then Jennings waved wordlessly at the rest of the   cave. Look at the big picture, he was saying imagine what else we’ll find! There was also Vanguard Cave next door, an even more promising site, because while Gorham’s had been partly excavated by less meticulous scientists in the 1940s and ’50s, Finlayson’s team was the first to touch Vanguard. Already they had uncovered a layer of perfectly preserved mud there. (“We suspect, if there’s a place where you’re going to find the first Neanderthal footprint, it will be here,” Finlayson said.) The “resolution” of the caves was incredible the wind blew sand in so fast that it preserved short periods, faithfully, like entries in a diary. Finlayson has described it as “the longest and most detailed record of [Neanderthals’] way of life that is currently available. ” This was the good news. And yet there were more than 20 other nearby caves that the Gibraltar Neanderthals might have used, and they were now underwater, behind us. When sea levels rose around 20, 000 years ago, the Mediterranean drowned them. It also drowned the wooded savanna between Gorham’s and the former coastline  —   where, presumably, the Neanderthals had spent an even larger share of their lives and left even more artifacts. So yes, Jennings was right: There was a lot of cave left to dig through. But it was like looking for needles in a haystack, and the entire haystack was merely the one needle they had managed to find in an astronomically larger haystack. And most of that haystack was now inaccessible forever. I could tell it wasn’t productive to dwell on the problem at this scale, while picking   husks from the hearth, but there it was. “Look, you can almost see what’s happening,” Finlayson eventually said. “The fire and the charcoal, the embers scattering. ” It was true. If you followed that stratum of sand away from the hearth, you could see, embedded in the wall behind us, black flecks where the smoke and cinders from this fire had blown. Suddenly, it struck me  —   though it should have earlier  —   that what we were looking at were the remnants of a single event: a specific fire, on a specific night, made by specific Neanderthals. Maybe this won’t sound that profound, but it snapped that prehistoric abstraction into focus. This wasn’t just a “hearth,” I realized it was a campfire. Finlayson began narrating the scene for me. A few Neanderthals cooked the ibex they had hunted and the mussels and nuts they had foraged and then, after dinner, made some tools around the fire. After they went to sleep and the fire died out, a hyena slinked in to scavenge scraps from the ashes and took a poop. Then  —   perhaps that same night  —   the wind picked up and covered everything with the fine layer of sand that these students were now brushing away. While we stood talking, one of the women uncovered a small flint ax, called a Levallois flake. After 50, 000 years, the edge was still sharp. They let me touch it. One of the earliest authorities on Neanderthals was a Frenchman named Marcellin Boule. A lot of what he said was wrong. In 1911, Boule began publishing his analysis of the first nearly complete Neanderthal skeleton ever discovered, which he named Old Man of La Chapelle, after the limestone cave where it was found. Laboring to reconstruct the Old Man’s anatomy, he deduced that its head must have been slouched forward, its spine hunched and its toes spread like an ape’s. Then, having reassembled the Neanderthal this way, Boule insulted it. This “brutish” and “clumsy” posture, he wrote, clearly indicated a lack of morals and a lifestyle dominated by “functions of a purely vegetative or bestial kind. ” A colleague of Boule’s went further, claiming that Neanderthals usually walked on all fours and never laughed: “  had no smile. ” Boule was part of a movement trying to reconcile natural selection with religion by portraying Neanderthals as closer to animals than to us, he could protect the ideal of a separate, immaculate human lineage. When he consulted with an artist to make a rendering of the Neanderthal, it came out looking like a furry, mean gorilla. Neanderthal fossils kept surfacing in Europe, and scholars like Boule were scrambling to make sense of them, improvising what would later grow into a new interdisciplinary field, now known as paleoanthropology. The evolution of that science was haphazard and often comically unscientific. An exhaustive history by Erik Trinkaus and Pat Shipman describes how Neanderthals became “mirrors that reflected, in all their awfulness and awesomeness, the nature and humanity of those who touched them. ” That included a lot of human blundering. It became clear only in 1957, for example  —   46 years after Boule, and after several   of the Old Man’s skeleton  —   that Boule’s particular Neanderthal, which led him to imagine all Neanderthals as   oafs, actually just had several deforming injuries and severe osteoarthritis. Still, Boule’s influence was  . Over the years, his ideologically tainted image of Neanderthals was often refracted through the lens of other ideologies, occasionally racist ones. In 1930, the prominent British anthropologist Sir Arthur Keith, writing in The New York Times, channeled Boule’s work to justify colonialism. For Keith, the replacement of an ancient, inferior species like Neanderthals by newer, heartier Homo sapiens proved that Britain’s actions in Australia  —   “The white man . .. replacing the most ancient type of brown man known to us”  —   was part of a natural order that had been operating for millenniums. It’s easy to get snooty about all this unenlightened paleoanthropology of the past. But all sciences operate by trying to fit new data into existing theories. And this particular science, for which the “data” has always consisted of scant and somewhat inscrutable bits of rock and fossil, often has to lean on those   even more heavily. “Assumptions, theories, expectations,” the University of Barcelona archaeologist João Zilhão says, “all must come into play a lot, because you are interpreting data that do not speak for themselves. ” Imagine, for example, working in a cave without any skulls or other easily distinguishable fossils and trying to figure out if you’re looking at a Neanderthal settlement or a more recent, modern human one. In the past, scientists might turn to the surrounding artifacts, interpreting more   tools as evidence of Neanderthals and more   tools as evidence of early modern humans. But working that way, it’s easy to miss evidence of Neanderthals’ resemblance to us, because, as soon as you see it, you assume they were us. So many techniques similarly hinge on interpretation and judgment, even perfectly   ones, like “morphometric analysis”  —   identifying fossils as belonging to one species rather than another by comparing particular parts of their anatomy  —   and radiocarbon dating. How the material to be dated is sampled and how results are calibrated are susceptible to drastic revision and bitter disagreement. (What’s more, because of an infuriating quirk of physics, the effectiveness of radiocarbon dating happens to break down around 40, 000 years ago  —   right around the time of the Neanderthal extinction. One of our best tools for looking into the past becomes unreliable at exactly the moment we’re most interested in examining.) Ultimately, a bottomless relativism can creep in: tenuous interpretations held up by webs of other interpretations, each strung from still more interpretations. Almost every archaeologist I interviewed complained that the field has become “overinterpreted”  —   that the ratio of physical evidence to speculation about that evidence is out of whack. Good stories can generate their own momentum. Starting in the 1920s, older and more exciting hominid fossils, like Homo erectus, began surfacing in Africa and Asia, and the field soon shifted its focus there. The Washington University anthropologist Erik Trinkaus, who began his career in the early ’70s, told me, “When I started working on Neanderthals, nobody really cared about them. ” The liveliest question about Neanderthals was still the first one: Were they our direct ancestors or the endpoint of a separate evolutionary track? Scientists called this question “the Neanderthal Problem. ” Some of the theories worked up to answer it encouraged different visions of Neanderthal intelligence and behavior. The “Multiregional Model,” for example, which had us descending from Neanderthals, was more inclined to see them as capable, sympathetic and fundamentally human the opposing “Out of Africa” hypothesis, which held that we moved in and replaced them, cast them as comparatively inferior. For decades, when evidence of a more advanced Neanderthal way of life turned up, it was often explained away, or mobbed by enough contrary or undermining interpretations that, over time, it never found real purchase. Some findings broke through more than others, however, like the discovery of what was essentially a small Neanderthal cemetery, in Shanidar Cave, in what is now Iraqi Kurdistan. There had been many compelling instances of Neanderthals’ burying their dead, but Shanidar was harder to ignore, especially after soil samples revealed the presence of huge amounts of pollen. This was interpreted as the remains of a funerary floral arrangement. An archaeologist at the center of this work, Ralph Solecki, published a book called “Shanidar: The First Flower People. ” It was 1971  —   the Age of Aquarius. Those flowers, he’d go on to write, proved that Neanderthals “had ‘soul. ’’u2009” Then again, Solecki’s idea was eventually discredited. In 1999, a more thorough analysis of the Shanidar grave site found that Neanderthals almost certainly did not leave flowers there. The pollen had been tracked in, thousands of years later, by burrowing,   rodents. (That said, even a   later, there are still paleoanthropologists at work on this question. It might not have been gerbils it may have been bees.) As more supposed anomalies surfaced, they became harder to brush off. In 1996, the paleoanthropologist   Hublin and others used CT scanning technology to   a bone fragment found in a French cave decades earlier, alongside a raft of advanced tools and artifacts, associated with the   Châtelperronian industry, which archaeologists always presumed was the work of early modern humans. Now Hublin’s analysis identified the bone as belonging to a Neanderthal. But rather than reascribe the Châtelperronian industry to Neanderthals, Hublin chalked up his findings to “acculturation”: Surely the Neanderthals must have learned how to make this stuff by watching us. “To me,” says Zilhão, the University of Barcelona archaeologist, “there was a logical shock: If the paradigm forces you to say something like this, there must be something wrong with the paradigm. ” Zilhão published a stinging critique challenging the field to shake off its “  prejudice. ” Papers were fired back and forth, igniting what Zilhão calls “a   war” and counting. Then, in the middle of that war, geneticists shook up the paradigm completely. A group at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany, led by Svante Paabo, had been assembling a draft sequence of a Neanderthal genome, using DNA recovered from bones. Their findings were published in 2010. It had already become clear by then that Homo sapiens and Neanderthals appeared in Eurasia separately  —   “Out of Africa was essentially right”  —   but Paabo’s work revealed that before the Neanderthals disappeared, the two groups mated. Even today, 40, 000 years after our gene pools stopped mixing, most living humans still carry Neanderthal DNA, making up roughly 1 to 2 percent of our total genomes. The data shows that we also apparently bred with other hominids, like the Denisovans, about which very little is known. It was staggering even Paabo couldn’t bring himself to believe it at first. But the results were the results, and they carried a sort of empirical magnetism that archaeological evidence lacks. “Geneticists are much more powerful, numerous and incomparably better funded than anyone else dealing with this stuff,” Zilhão said. He joked: “Their aura is kind of miraculous. It’s a bit like receiving the Ten Commandments from God. ” Paabo’s work, and a continuing wave of genomic research, has provided clarity but also complexity, recasting our oppositional,   relationship into something more communal and collaborative  —   and perhaps not just on the genetic level. The extent of the interbreeding supported previous speculation, by a minority of paleoanthropologists, that there might have been cases of Neanderthals and modern humans living alongside each other, intermeshed, for centuries, and that generations of their offspring had found places in those communities, too. Then again, it’s also possible that some of the interbreeding was forced. Paabo now recommends against imagining separate species of human evolution altogether: not an Us and a Them, but one enormous “metapopulation” composed of shifting clusters of essentially   things that periodically coincided in time and space and, when they happened to bump into one another, occasionally had sex. Lunch happened at the mouth of Gorham’s Cave, out in the sun. I ate a sandwich on a log, facing the sea, alongside Jennings and a few of his Liverpool students, while the young men and women from Spain mingled behind us, laughing and stretching and helping one another crack their backs. The language barrier seemed to discourage the two cohorts from talking much. And yet the students lived together during the excavation and had somehow achieved a muffled camaraderie. Even Jennings and his counterpart, José María Gutiérrez López, a veteran archaeologist from a museum in Cádiz, had a somewhat similar dynamic, despite working closely together for many summers at Gorham’s. Neither was terribly fluent in the other’s language, but their silence, by this point, seemed warm and knowing. Waiting for our ride at the end of one workday, I noticed them staring at a plastic bag snagged in the concertina wire above an old military gate. The bag had been there for a long, long time, Jennings told me. Then he turned and uttered, “Cinco años?” Gutiérrez López smiled. “Sí,” he said, nodding. I, meanwhile, felt compelled to test out all of this as a model for   relations. That contact obsessed me: What would it have been like to look out over a grassy plain and watch parallel humanity pass by? Scientists often turn to historical first contacts as frames of reference, like the arrival of Europeans among Native Americans, or Captain Cook landing in Australia  —   largely histories of violence and subjugation. But as Zilhão points out, typically one of those two cultures set out to conquer the other. “Those people were conscious that they’d come from somewhere else,” he told me. “They were a product of a civilization that had books, that had studied their past. ” Homo sapiens encountering Neanderthals would have been different: They met uncoupled from politics and history neither identified as part of a network of millions of supposedly more advanced people. And so, as Finlayson put it to me: “Each valley could have told a different story. In one, they may have hit each other over the head. In another, they may have made love. In another, they ignored each other. ” It’s a kind of coexistence that our modern imaginations may no longer be sensitive enough to envision. So much of our identity as a species is tied up in our anomalousness, in our dominion over others. But that narcissistic   is an exceedingly recent privilege. (“Outside the world of Tolkienesque fantasy literature, we tend to think that it is normal for there to be just one human species on Earth at a time,” the writers Dimitra Papagianni and Michael A. Morse explain. “The past 20 or 30 millennia, however, have been the exception. ”) Now, eating lunch, I considered that the   of humans and Neanderthals hadn’t been so trippy or profound after all. Maybe it looked as mundane as this: two groups, lingering on a beach, only sort of acknowledging each other. Maybe the many millenniums during which we shared Eurasia was, much of the time, like a superlong elevator ride with strangers. Some paleoanthropologists are starting to reimagine the extinction of Neanderthals as equally prosaic: not the culmination of some epic clash of civilizations but an aggregate result of a long, ecological muddle. Strictly speaking, extinction is what happens after a species fails to maintain a higher proportion of births to deaths  —   it’s a numbers game. And so the real competition between Neanderthals and early modern humans wasn’t localized quarrels for food or territory but a quiet,   demographic marathon: each species repopulating itself, until one fell so far behind that it vanished. And we had a big head start. “When modern humans came,” notes Chris Stringer, a paleoanthropologist at Britain’s Natural History Museum, “there just weren’t that many Neanderthals around. ” For millenniums, some scientists believe, before modern humans poured in from Africa, the climate in Europe was exceptionally unstable. The landscape kept flipping between temperate forest and cold, treeless steppe. The fauna that Neanderthals subsisted on kept migrating away, faster than they could. Though Neanderthals survived this turbulence, they were never able to build up their numbers. (Across all of Eurasia, at any point in history, says John Hawks, an anthropologist at the University of   “there probably weren’t enough of them to fill an N. F. L. stadium. ”) With the demographics so skewed, Stringer went on, even the slightest modern human advantage would be amplified tremendously: a single innovation, something like sewing needles, might protect just enough babies from the elements to lower the infant mortality rate and allow modern humans to conclusively overtake the Neanderthals. And yet Stringer is careful not to conflate innovation with superior intelligence. Innovation, too, can be a function of population size. “We live in an age where information, where good ideas, spread like wildfire, and we build on them,” Stringer told me. “But it wasn’t like that 50, 000 years ago. ” The more members your species has, the more likely one member will stumble on a useful new technology  —   and that, once stumbled upon, the innovation will spread you need sufficient human tinder for those sparks of culture to catch. “There was nothing inevitable about modern human success,” Stringer says. “It was luck. ” We didn’t defeat the Neanderthals we just swamped them. Trinkaus compares it to how European wildcats are currently disappearing, absorbed into much larger populations of house cats gone feral. It wasn’t a flattering analogy  —   we are the house cats  —   but that was Trinkaus’s point: “I think a lot of this is basically banal,” he says. Showing me around the Gibraltar Museum one morning, Finlayson described the petering out of Neanderthals on the Rock with unnerving pathos. Gibraltar, with its comparatively stable climate, would have been one of their last refuges, he explained, and he likened the population there to critically endangered species today, like snow leopards or imperiled butterflies: living relics carrying on in small, fragmented populations long after they’ve passed a genetic point of no return. “They became a ghost species,” Finlayson said. We happened to be standing in front of two Neanderthals, exquisitely lifelike sculptures the museum unveiled last spring, on a sweep of sand in their own austere gallery. They were scientific reconstructions, extrapolated by artists from casts of actual fossils. (These two were based on the only Neanderthal skulls ever recovered in Gibraltar: that first woman’s skull, sent to George Busk in 1864, and another, of a child, unearthed in 1926.) They were called Nana and Flint. Finlayson’s wife, Geraldine, and son, Stewart  —   both scientists who work closely with him at the museum  —   had helped him come up with the names. The boy had his arms thrown around Nana’s waist, his cheek on her thigh. He was   himself behind her leg, as kids do, but also stared out, straight at us, slightly alarmed, or helpless. “I don’t get tired of looking at them,” Finlayson said. He had commissioned the Neanderthals from Dutch artists known as Kennis  Kennis, and he was initially taken aback by the woman’s posture in their sketches. She stood oddly, with her arms crossed in front of her chest, resting on opposite shoulders, as if she were  . But Kennis  Kennis barraged him with ethnographic photos: real   people standing just like this, or even more strangely, their hands behind their necks or slung over their heads. As it happens, the artists had an intense personal interest in where human beings leave their hands when they don’t have pockets. I’d never thought about this before  —   I’ve always had pockets  —   and I wondered if artists might expose these perceptual bubbles more pointedly than archaeologists. Kennis  Kennis appeared to be major players in the tiny field of Paleolithic reconstruction. Scientists who had worked with them encouraged me to seek them out. “They’re great people,” one archaeologist told me. “Hyperactive. Like rubber balls. ” The Kennis brothers, Adrie and Alfons, are each 50 years old: identical twins. They are sturdy, attractive men, with dark, wildly swirling hair, and live in the small Dutch city of Arnhem, southeast of Amsterdam. When I arrived at Adrie’s house last summer, I found Alfons at the end of the driveway, glasses sliding down his nose, carefully filling a crack in the robin’   butt cheek of a silicon Neanderthal mold. Kennis  Kennis had gradually   Adrie’s house as a second studio. Most of their work and materials were here:   headless bodies of various human species and a wall of shelves filled with skulls and heads. The heads were frighteningly realistic, with glass eyes and fleshy faces that begged to be touched. When the brothers fly around Europe to pitch to museums, they take these heads with them, like salesmen’s samples. “On the airplane! We have heads!” Adrie shouted. “They scan things!” Alfons shouted. And slowly I understood: The brothers thought it was hilarious that airport security never questioned them about their duffel bags full of heads. “I never have to open my bags!” Adrie said, then he scampered to the wall, where a particular head had caught his eye: very   with a rough, bushy beard and rawness in its upper lip  —   a reconstruction of a primitive Homo sapiens skull found in Morocco. Adrie held the head in his palm and hollered, “Bowling!” while pretending to bowl with it. Then he laughed and laughed and laughed. That was how it went for the rest of the day. They spoke in a bifurcated riot, seldom finishing sentences, just skipping ahead once they had spit out the key words. And if a thought escaped them or their English faltered, they didn’t go silent instead, they repeated the last word, or made a strange guttural drone, as if thrusting some heavy weight over their heads, to fill the space. Their first big commission came in 2006, for the Neanderthal Museum, on the site of Neander Valley. It emerged as a jovial,   old man, with woefulness, or maybe just exhaustion, behind his eyes. That jolt of Neanderthal individuality has been a trademark of their work ever since. It elevates Neanderthals out of a single homogeneous abstraction and endows them with personhood. (At one point, Adrie described watching a neighbor spend an entire day   each brick of his driveway. He had an epiphany: “All the types of people around us, there must have been Neanderthals just like them. ” Alfons added: “Neanderthal neat freaks! Neanderthal Bill Gates! ”) What the brothers want, they told me, is for the viewer to catch herself relating to the Neanderthal  —   to recognize, in a visceral way, that Neanderthals sit at the fragile edge of our own identities. To feel that, Adrie explained, “they need to look you in the eye. ” They were obsessed  —   the only word for it  —   and have been since age 7, when Alfons found a picture of a Neanderthal skeleton in a book, and it instantly possessed them both. They spent a lot of time at their parents’ restaurant, after school and on weekends: With nothing to do, they started drawing Neanderthals. They drew feverishly, combatively, each brother keenly aware of whose rib cage looked brawnier, who had rendered more beautiful shadows on his Neanderthal’s upper lip. “We were both the dumbest guys in the whole school!” Alfons said. “We couldn’t count!” Drawing was all they knew how to do. As young men, they tried to teach art but couldn’t find steady employment. Their family told them to give up their crazy preoccupation. They wouldn’t. They made art at night and took custodial jobs at a psychiatric hospital. They organized the Christmas talent show and played   with the residents. Initially they were painters, not sculptors. They made   reconstructions only to have lifelike models to paint: They were that meticulous, that fixated on knowing how the musculature of a Neanderthal hung off its skeleton. Because they had to produce a   individual, the brothers were forced to make decisions about what paleoanthropologists had the luxury of describing as spectra of variation. Geneticists can suggest a probable scope of skin and hair colors. But the brothers must imagine the wear on a particular Neanderthal’s skin after a hard life outside, or the abuse his toenails would take. And would Neanderthals wear ponytails? Would they shear their bangs away, to get their hair out of their faces? “Every culture does something with their hair!” Alfons insisted. “There’s no culture that does nothing with their hair. ” This uncorked a frantic seminar on known global hairstyles of the last several thousand years. They began pulling up photos on Adrie’s laptop, dozens of them, from anthropological archives or stills from old ethnographic films. These were some of the same photos they had shown Finlayson. The brothers had pored over them for years but still gasped or bellowed now as each new, improbable human form materialized. The pictures showed a panorama of divergent body types and grooming: spiky eyebrows astonishingly asymmetrical breasts a towering aboriginal man with the chiseled torso of an American underwear model, but two twigs for legs a Hottentot woman with an extraordinarily convex rear end. “People would never let us make buttocks like this!” Alfons said regretfully. “All this variation! It’s beautiful!” shouted Adrie, refusing to look away from the screen. He had to look: These were reaches of reality that our minds didn’t travel to on their own. “If you live in the West, you’d never imagine,” he went on. The brothers’ delight seemed to come from feeling all these superficial differences quiver against a profound,   sameness. Finally, Adrie turned to me and said very seriously, “These are all Homo sapiens. ” They showed me more photos. “It’s real, it’s real, it’s real!” Alfons kept shouting. Adrie said, “Unimaginable, unimaginable, unimaginable!” It only registered later: I had spent the day with identical twins who, since childhood, have been stupefied by how different human beings can be. At the rear of Gorham’s Cave, past the hearth the team was excavating, there was a tall metal staircase. It led up to a long catwalk, which led to a locked steel gate. I waited there one morning while Finlayson fumbled around in his pocket. Then he turned his key. The excavation had worked through this narrowed rear chamber of the cave years earlier and discovered, at the end of the 2012 season, an engraving on the floor: a crosshatched pattern of 13 grooves in the bedrock. A tide of specialists flowed into Gorham’s. They determined that the engraving was made at least 39, 000 years ago and ruled out its having been created inadvertently  —   left over after skinning an animal, say. In controlled experiments, it took between 188 and 317 strokes with a flint tool to create the entire figure. “What we’ve always said,” Finlayson explained, “is it’s intentional and it’s not functional. You can call that art, if you like. ” The finding was published in The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences in 2014. The news media called the engraving “the hashtag. ” One scientist described the elaborate crosshatch as watershed evidence of Neanderthals’ capacity for “complex symbolic thought” and “abstract expression. ” But several archaeologists told me they believe that there are many clearer signs of Neanderthals’ capacity for complex cognition and symbolism, including a discovery in Southern France last year that seemed to dwarf the hashtag’s significance. (More than 1, 000 feet into the Bruniquel Cave, Neanderthals assembled two rings of 400 deliberately broken stalagmites, with other material piled and propped around it  —   like a labyrinth, or a shrine.) But Finlayson was undaunted. He turned the hashtag into a logo for the   rebranding of his museum. There was a hashtag decal on the van he picked me up in every morning. We stood and talked for a while until, finally, with Richard   aplomb, Finlayson lifted a tarp and showed it to me. It did not make a tremendous impact at first  —   it was lines in rock. But Finlayson went on, pointing to a spot near the entrance to this isolated anteroom, a few feet across from the engraving, where the team had excavated another hearth. Neanderthals built fires in that exact spot, on and off, for 8, 000 years, he said  —   until their disappearance from Gibraltar. But few animal bones were recovered here it wasn’t a place they cooked. And the location of the fire was also puzzling: Neanderthals usually situated fires at the fronts of caves, to control smoke. And yet, Finlayson explained, “if you look up, this has a natural chimney. ” We flung our heads back: A chute coursed through the high, craggy ceiling above us. It seemed, Finlayson explained, that the Neanderthals did their butchering and cooking at the front of Gorham’s, then retired here at night. Lighting a fire at this hearth would block the narrowest point in the cave, sealing off this chamber from predators. You could hang out here, Finlayson said, “have a   snack or something,” then head to bed. “See there?” he said, motioning to a smaller opening to our right. It led to a second room, similar to this one. “This,” Finlayson said, “is the bedroom. ” I looked again at the hashtag. It wasn’t on the cave floor, exactly, as it was usually described, but on a broad ledge, a foot or two off the ground. It made for a perfect bench, and it was suddenly easy to imagine a Neanderthal sitting on it, in ideal proximity to the fire. For all I knew, the hashtag marked his or her favorite seat. But Finlayson wasn’t done. After the Neanderthal artifacts disappear from Gorham’s sediment layers, there’s a gap of many thousand years  —   a thick stack of empty sand. Then other artifacts appear: Modern humans occupied the cave and built a fire here, too, just a couple of feet from the Neanderthals’ hearth. They used the bedroom annex as well. They left a cave painting on the wall in there: a gorgeous red stag, indisputably recognizable to us  —   their descendants  —   as art. Another 18, 000 years passed, give or take. The Phoenicians came. And they left offerings back here there were shards of their ceramics under the catwalk we had just crossed. Then, 2, 000 years after that, in 1907, a certain Captain A. Gorham of Britain’s Second Battalion Royal Munster Fusiliers arrived. Gorham didn’t discover Gorham’s Cave, Finlayson told me it had always been impossible to miss. “That’s what he found,” Finlayson said. “That’s really Gorham’s Cave. ” He pointed to the bedroom, and we both turned, bathing it with our headlamps. Beside the entrance was written, in big block letters, GORHAM’S CAVE 1907, with a chunky black arrow pointing to the doorway. Gorham had written his name directly over the spot where, some 39, 000 years earlier, a Neanderthal had made his or her own mark. The full sweep and synchronicity of this history hadn’t seemed to occur to Finlayson before. Hesitantly, he said, “Maybe there are special places in the world that have universal human appeal. ” I felt a similar, uncanny rush when I noticed that, at some point while he talked, we had each instinctually taken a seat on the rock ledge, next to the hashtag, and were now sitting side by side, staring into space where the two ancient campfires once burned. It’s not an especially spiritual experience when one human being walks into another human being’s kitchen for the first time and simply knows where the silverware drawer is. At the back of Gorham’s, though, that intuition was spread across two distinct kinds of humans and tens of thousands of years. Ultimately, why we are here and the Neanderthals are not can no longer be explained in a way that implies that our existence is particularly meaningful or secure. But at least moments like this placed our existence inside some longer,    continuity. It was the day of the Brexit vote. After   from the cave with Finlayson, I would spend the rest of the afternoon rejiggering my travel plans in a mild panic, trying to catch a ride out of Gibraltar and into Spain that night, so that if the Spanish exacted a retaliatory   after the results were announced, I could still make my flight home from Malaga the next day. I won’t describe the scenes I saw that morning  —   the blankness on people’s faces at the airport, phone calls I overheard  —   except to say that when I woke up on Nov. 9, after our own election, I felt equipped with at least a faint frame of reference. Reality seemed heightened and a little dangerous, because for so many people, including me, it had broken away from our expectations. We had misunderstood the present in the same way archaeologists can misunderstand the past. What was possible was suddenly exposed as grossly insufficient, because, to borrow Finlayson’s metaphor, we never imagined that the few jigsaw puzzle pieces we based it on constituted such a tiny part of the whole. Even some on the winning sides seemed similarly stunned and adrift. Many, though, just felt vindicated. Later that summer, I came across an essay for a British weekly by the actress Elizabeth Hurley, a fervent Leave supporter, who was now doubling down. “Knock yourselves out calling us   Neanderthals,” she wrote, “and spit a bit more venom and vitriol our way. You are showing yourselves in all your meanspirited,   elitist glory. ” When I read that, I took genuine umbrage  —   but on the Neanderthals’ behalf. And while I hate to admit it, I also felt a cheap but delicious tingle of smugness, because I now knew that “Neanderthal” wasn’t the insult Hurley thought it was  —   though this, I simultaneously realized, also closed a certain   loop and promoted, in me, the very   elitist glory Hurley was incensed by, thus deepening the divide. It was dizzying and sad and maybe inevitably human, but still no help to us at all.

6 - When C. I. A. interrogators in a Thailand prison sent a cable to agency headquarters recounting that they had been slamming Abu Zubaydah, a captured terrorism suspect, against a wall, they emphasized that they were obeying instructions to take steps to prevent his injury, like putting a   towel behind his neck, and described the practice in detached terms. “Subject was walled with the question, ‘What is it that you do not want us to know? ’” reported a cable from Aug. 5, 2002, part of a trove of newly disclosed documents about the agency’s   “enhanced interrogation” program. “Subject continued to deny that he had any information. ” From the perspective of Mr. Zubaydah  —   whom interrogators eventually conceded had no additional information, contrary to their suspicions at the time  —   the experience felt far different. “He kept banging me against the wall,” Mr. Zubaydah told his lawyer in 2008, in a narrative that has now been declassified. “Given the intensity of the banging that was strongly hitting my head I fell down on the floor with each banging. I felt for few instants that I was unable to see anything, let alone the short chains that prevented me from standing tall. And every time I fell he would drag me with the towel which caused bleeding in my neck. ” Batches of newly disclosed documents about the Central Intelligence Agency’s defunct torture program are providing new details about its practices of slamming terrorism suspects into walls, confining them in coffinlike boxes and subjecting them to waterboarding  —   as well as internal disputes over whether two psychologists who designed the program were competent. The release of the newly available primary documents, which include information not discussed in a   executive summary of the Senate Intelligence Committee’s investigation into the C. I. A. torture program that was released in 2014, comes at the same time as an urgent legal battle is unfolding over the potential fate of the     full version of that report. Lawyers for two detainees who were subjected to the C. I. A. ’s most extreme “enhanced” interrogation techniques, Mr. Zubaydah and Abd     the suspected mastermind of the deadly October 2000 attack on the American destroyer Cole, are asking federal judges to order the executive branch to deposit a copy of the full report with the judiciary to ensure that the Trump administration and congressional Republicans do not destroy it. But the Obama administration, in its waning hours, is fighting that idea. On Thursday, the judge overseeing Mr. Zubaydah’s habeas corpus case, Emmet G. Sullivan, ordered the United States government to “immediately” preserve a complete, unredacted copy of the Senate report and deposit it with the court for secure storage by Feb. 10. Against that backdrop, the two sets of newly available documents present a vivid contrast in perspectives, as the C. I. A. cables recount in bloodless bureaucratese the infliction of techniques that Mr. Zubaydah recalled experiencing in harrowing terms. For example, when interrogators at a C. I. A. black site prison in Thailand confined Mr. Zubaydah in a cramped box on Aug. 5, 2002, they observed to headquarters that he showed “signs of distress,” according to one of the cables from a group the government declassified as part of a lawsuit against the psychologists who designed the program. The lawsuit is being brought by detainees represented by lawyers including from the American Civil Liberties Union. The A. C. L. U. provided the documents to The New York Times. Mr. Zubaydah remembered the box experience in more vivid terms. “I felt I was going to explode from bending my legs and my back and from being unable to spread them not even for short instants,” he wrote to his lawyers in 2008, noting that the box was so short and tight he could not sit up or change positions. “The very strong pain made me scream unconsciously. ” Other C. I. A. cables also clinically recount applying torture methods like the suffocation technique known as waterboarding. (Previously disclosed documents and the Senate report executive summary had already discussed Mr. Zubaydah’s waterboarding in extensive detail, including that he was subjected to the treatment 83 times in one month.) The contemporaneous cables describe him crying, but generally use bland descriptions, like: “Water treatment was applied. ” For Mr. Zubaydah, it felt as if he was “dying. ” “They kept pouring water and concentrating on my nose and my mouth until I really felt I was drowning and my chest was just about to explode from the lack of oxygen. ” Mr. Zubaydah also described experiencing what he thought were persistent health consequences of his torture, including severe headaches and seizures. Many other detainees experienced lasting harm after harsh treatment in American custody, including   stress disorder, a recent New York Times investigation found. Another group of documents produced in discovery from that lawsuit, first provided by the A. C. L. U. to The Washington Post, showed that in   about a year after the agency hired the two contract psychologists, James Mitchell and J. Bruce Jessen, to design a torture regimen for Mr. Zubaydah, unidentified C. I. A. employees raised sharp questions about their ethics and competence to judge whether the techniques they had orchestrated were harmful or effective. While other documents, including the Senate report summary, have shown that there were internal concerns about relying so heavily on the two psychologists, the newly available documents add texture to that history. For example, a June 2003 message that appears to have been sent by an official representing a “Renditions and Detainees Group” at the C. I. A. which had assumed control of Mr. Mitchell’s and Mr. Jessen’s activities, criticized the psychologists’ “arrogance and narcissism” and “blatant disregard for the ethics shared by almost all of their colleagues. ” But the same message also recommended that the two psychologists be assigned to develop a code of ethics and standards for interrogators. “We have identified this as a major gap in our program,” the official wrote. A lawyer for the psychologists, Henry F. Schuelke III, declined to comment. The newly available files supplement the publicly available historical record about the torture program, intensifying questions about whether the public will ever see the full fruits of the Senate Intelligence Committee’s investigation  —   the result of years of combing and contextualizing millions of pages of government documents by committee staff members. Democrats raised fears last month that the incoming administration of   Donald J. Trump, who has voiced support for the outlawed interrogation methods detailed in the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence report, could cause all copies of the document to be “hidden indefinitely, or destroyed. ” In 2015, after Republicans took control of the Senate and the Intelligence Committee, they asked President Obama to return all copies of the full report, which former Democratic senators have said contains “volumes of new information” that were not made public when a   executive summary was disclosed in 2014. Mr. Obama did not comply with that request, and in December of last year, he notified the Senate that he was including a copy of the full,   report in his presidential records that would be deposited at the National Archives. But Michel Paradis, a lawyer for Mr. Nashiri, argued that Mr. Obama’s decision about his presidential records was insufficient, because Mr. Trump might seek to withdraw the report from the archives and destroy it. Last week, in response to a request by Mr. Nashiri’s lawyers to secure a copy of the full report in the hands of the judiciary, Judge Royce C. Lamberth of the Federal District Court for the District of Columbia ordered the Obama administration to provide a copy to the court’s security officer. (Lawyers for Mr. Zubaydah are separately making the same request.) But in court filings, the Obama administration asked Judge Lamberth to reconsider, making two arguments: Preserving it would interfere with   branch relations, and giving a copy to the court was unnecessary in part because of Mr. Obama’s archived copy. It also suggested that the executive branch would appeal if the judge did not change his mind. On Thursday afternoon, Judge Lamberth refused, saying in a terse,   order that the court was “obliged” to protect Mr. Nashiri’s possible right to access the report and saying that nothing had changed since he issued the original, “crystal clear” order. He threatened to hold the executive branch in contempt if it did not comply, although he did not set a specific deadline. The C. I. A. cables revealed other potentially important new details. For example, detainees at C. I. A. prisons have long claimed that they were injected with unknown drugs against their consent, which had powerful effects on them  —   something that medical experts have denounced as unethical. While previously released documents from 2004 said that C. I. A. prisoners could be sedated as a last resort, a newly released cable describes a different practice. In April 2002, C. I. A. personnel at an interrogation site wrote that they planned to transport a detainee  —   apparently Mr. Zubaydah  —   “in a state of pharmaceutical unconsciousness to decrease potential security concerns as well as to maximize the intended effect of disorienting” him. It is unclear from the documents whether the C. I. A. followed through. The new information is consistent with the conclusion of the Senate committee’s torture report that the C. I. A. ’s use of enhanced interrogation techniques was not effective in acquiring intelligence or gaining cooperation from detainees. On Aug. 18, 2002, after 15 days during which Mr. Zubaydah was repeatedly waterboarded, kept for hours in small boxes, pushed into walls and threatened, the interrogators sent a cable to headquarters stating their conclusions. The prisoner “has not provided significant actionable info beyond previously provided details,” they wrote.

6 - On Jan. 21, the day after the inauguration, women from all over the country will be rolling into Washington for what promises to be an enormous protest against Donald J. Trump. But millions of women went to the polls for Mr. Trump on Election Day, including, according to surveys, 53 percent of white women. Why did they? Conventional wisdom that his behavior and remarks would disqualify him in the eyes of many women proved wrong. Interviews with more than a dozen women around the country showed a range of reasons for their support: worries about the economy, anger about the Affordable Care Act and the price of health care, protection of Second Amendment rights, fears about immigration and terrorism, and opposition to abortion. But many women also voted against Hillary Clinton, voicing deep suspicions about the American deaths in Benghazi, Libya her use of a private email server and the hacked emails of the Democratic National Committee as proof that she said one thing in public and another in private. Here are excerpts, condensed and edited, from their thoughts. Voter: Rebecca Gregory, 46. Nurse. Home: Roseville, Mich. In 2008 and 2012, I voted for Obama, I was   marriage, Planned Parenthood was very important to me. But after eight years, I saw there was much more racial divide than there had ever been, I didn’t like the way the economy is going and I didn’t like the stance he took on police. My husband is a court officer and volunteers in the police force. [President Obama] didn’t support law enforcement the way he did the community that felt they were being unjustly treated. I think he could have done a better job instead of pointing blame. Instead of saying we need to educate people on how to behave when they’re being pulled over by the police. I’m seeing a barrage of patients coming in from different countries. An Iraqi immigrant came in last night, he needs dialysis. He will never be productive in the U. S. he will always be dependent on Medicaid. I feel for him, I want to help him, but we have to take care of our own people first. Driving to work yesterday, I saw three homeless people. They need our help. If I turned down every candidate who objectified women, I’d vote for no one. _____ Voter: Sandy Pearson, 48. Studying to be a mortgage broker. Home: Chattanooga, Tenn. Trump’s not a perfect man, by any means. He kind of reminds me of my  . I think he’s a really good man, deep down. This guy has such potential, and I truly believe he cares about our country and wants to help everyone. I do read things on occasion that he tweets and I think, oh my word. I wish I could have had 10 minutes with him. Listen, Donald, you need to straighten up and stop with this foolishness. What he said about women was disrespectful. But I don’t get offended like some people do. You get through the bad and you focus on the good. Basically these were our choices, and I felt he was the better choice, and I had to overlook the negatives and focus on the positives. At the very beginning of this election, I was leaning toward Bernie Sanders. I looked at all the candidates, what were their ideas to help our country out of debt and make our military strong and be there for our vets. I have so many friends whose health care costs have doubled and are having to get extra jobs just to pay their insurance. And I read all these things about people where their religious liberties are not being taken seriously. _____ Voter: Deb Alighire, 44. Engineer and program manager at Mopar, a subsidiary of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles. Home: Clarkston, Mich. I’m very focused on bringing the plants back. In metro Detroit, waiters usually were younger people and during the time of hardship, the bankruptcies, it was very striking to me to go to a Papa Gino’s and have a   man being a waiter. Usually these people would have some kind of job related to the automotive industry. I’m super excited about Trump. I believe he knows how to build things. My dad worked at a coal power plant for 39 years and they’re freaked out about energy changing too quickly. I’m also concerned about immigration. I went to Minnesota and I had a Somali cabdriver who lectured me for 35 minutes to the airport about how women in America have too much freedom. My thought process on that is that I don’t like seeing people going through the hardship they go through, but I don’t want to go backwards in the feminist movement, either. _____ Voter: Taylor Davis, 27. Works in a small business. Home: Enfield, Conn. I helped campaign for Obama and I was a   Bernie supporter. When he backed Hillary Clinton, I couldn’t get behind it. Both my parents are engineers. My mom was an engineer long before many women in the field. When the economy started faltering, she went from a very high position at Pratt  Whitney to being unemployed for a year, and that was heartbreaking. I think that Trump really cares about having   jobs back here, not necessarily the service industry. Do I think Trump’s trying to send women back to the kitchen? No, his daughter is a great example. She ran the    campaign long before he ran for president. _____ Voter: Robin Mueller, 42. Preschool teacher. Home: Sterling Heights, Mich. I made up my mind for Trump at the last minute. Since my husband is in the military, I was concerned about having someone who didn’t have military experience, didn’t have the knowledge of dealing with world leaders. And I kind of thought he had a big mouth. But I had an    who was totally on the Trump train. He talked me into taking him to a Trump rally. I expected him to be like what I’d seen on the news, saying hateful things. But his presence was very calming and I liked his talking points. We really are the middle class, and we kind of get swept aside. The first time she ran against Obama, I was all on board for Hillary Clinton. I really wanted to have a female president. I think that’s important. But I’m not sure that’s her. In the past, her stance on abortion was more the way I feel, just for the first trimester, then she did a 360. She was here in the primary, having a debate with Bernie Sanders. He answered the question honestly. When they asked her the same question, she kind of danced around it. Then she went on “The View” and said she was for   abortions. Just take a stance, be honest. Same thing as with gay marriage, she wasn’t for it, then she was. I’m 100 percent for it. It’s ridiculous the way we tell people who they can and cannot marry. Don’t go back and forth. Don’t pander. I voted for Obama the last time. I don’t agree with a lot of what he said, but I felt he was honest. _____ Voter: Katie Holder, 39. Owns a   business. Home: Gulf Shores, Ala. I feel very, very badly for the people who are very scared for their way of life. From what I’m understanding, he’s only really wanting illegal immigrants that have committed crimes to be deported, which I agree with. I feel bad for the lesbian and gay and transsexual community that fear for their way of life. From what I understand, he says he’s not going to mess with that. Somebody called me a racist because I did vote for Trump. Hold on, you don’t know me. Doesn’t that make you a racist by calling me a racist when you don’t know me? I’m looking for a brighter future for me and my children, and honestly I felt l like our country was kind of at risk if we did elect Hillary. _____ Voter: Victoria Czapski, 45. Works in education. Home: Sterling Heights, Mich. I felt he had what it would take to get the country back on track. Being P. C. was going to kill the country. He speaks his mind and because of that, he’s not going to lie to you. I don’t want immigrants, accepting them without doing the background checks. Are these people terrorists? I don’t want to live in a country where we have to worry about going to the movie theater or the mall. Let’s be on the offensive, versus the defensive. We are a country based on immigrants. But I believe they should go through the process. My   came here, they had to learn English. This is a Christian country. The whole bending over backwards. He says what everyone’s thinking and is afraid to say. That doesn’t make anyone bigoted. I’m not saying there are people out there who shouldn’t be helped. I worked in the inner cities. They’re on welfare. They make a certain amount of money and everything gets taken away. That amount of money is so low that they have no incentive to work. Why don’t you allow them to gradually earn more money? Find a way to help people get over the hump. _____ Voter: Pam Cornett, 46. Formerly   now working in customer service. Home: Chattanooga, Tenn. I voted for Trump because I wanted change. I feel like our economy has totally tanked. People do not have disposable income. I feel the last eight years have been a joke. Obama was out for himself. I don’t think he really respected the office. I think it was more about him being a celebrity than a president. Trump’s a successful businessman, and I feel like that’s what America needs to bring our economy back. I don’t think Donald Trump is really Republican, to be quite honest with you. He’s not in a box. One of the most attractive things to me is he can’t be boxed. He wants to bring America back to what it was before. I don’t think it’s taking us back to women have no rights or slavery days. _____ Voter: Paula Filar, 71. Retired business owner. Home: Shelby Township, Mich. I thought if he would only have kept his mouth shut during the primary. About the way people looked, about their size. Really? About McCain. I mean, really? All of it was so egregious. I hated it, I cringed. All of that was bad, but it didn’t stop me. And it’s like Hillary has the right to talk about Trump when she stayed with a guy who was in the White House and took advantage of a young intern? Why would you stay with him? Benghazi. The emails. The I. R. S. She’s a liar. The Clintons got wealthy because of their position. I’d rather have someone there who doesn’t need the money. He’s got a message. He’s going to make a change. Her message was all him. All negative ads. I spent a long time in the staffing industry here, worked with the automotive industry. We weren’t competitive. That’s got to be turned around. We have to have incentives for companies to keep their work here. _____ Voter: Tangie Wooden, 44. Learning facilitator for Blue Cross of Tennessee. Home: Ringgold, Ga. When Trump became my only choice, I felt he was the lesser of two evils. I had major issues with Hillary as far as ethics was concerned. It seems she feels that she is above the law and nothing ever seems to stick. I didn’t particularly like everything he was saying as far as building a wall, and doing this to immigrants. I looked at that more as bravado, his audience needed that to get the applause. But there are allegations about killing people who get in her way  —   Vince Foster, people like that. Someone who has a big bravado is not as concerning to me as someone who might kill people who get in her way. _____ Voter: Kasia Riddle, 43. Substitute teacher. Home: Murfreesboro, Tenn. I run my household like a business, my classroom like a business. I expect him to run the country in such a manner. You don’t pay more money out than you have. You want to have your budget under control. You want to know the people you’re working with are above average. You want to pick the people based on what they can do, not on what they did for you. He’s not getting large amounts from donors based on what you’ll do for me later. _____ Voter: Guzin Karides, 49. Homemaker, former attorney. Home: Virginia Beach I laughed Trump off like everyone else did. Once I stopped laughing at him and started listening, I started to support him. I felt like once you got past the bluster, he really was interested in helping everyone. I do think having a secure border is very important. My father was a Muslim immigrant from Turkey, he went through the process. I don’t agree with a ban on Muslims, but my father was very wary of Muslims who came over if they didn’t have a reason to be here. He would support a full vetting, but not a total ban. I have always considered myself a feminist. For me, I want to be treated the exact same way. That’s not the feel I get from feminists today, they want extra privileges. I gave up my first marriage so I could be a law partner and then I had to give up on my partnership so I could be a better mom. To say women are going backwards would be wrong. Look at how much Trump hires women, how much he does rely on women, how much he relies on his own daughter. I’m sort of amazed by her. She may pull him more into the middle. She’ll be a good voice for women.



########################################################################################################################

