0 - After the bullet shells get counted, the blood dries and the votive candles burn out, people peer down from   windows and see crime scenes gone cold: a band of yellow police tape blowing in the breeze. The South Bronx, just across the Harlem River from Manhattan and once shorthand for urban dysfunction, still suffers violence at levels long ago slashed in many other parts of New York City. And yet the city’s efforts to fight it remain splintered, underfunded and burdened by scandal. In the 40th Precinct, at the southern tip of the Bronx, as in other poor, minority neighborhoods across the country, people long hounded for   infractions are crying out for more protection against grievous injury or death. By September, four of every five shootings in the precinct this year were unsolved. Out of the city’s 77 precincts, the 40th has the highest murder rate but the fewest detectives per violent crime, reflecting disparities in staffing that hit hardest in some neighborhoods outside Manhattan, according to a New York Times analysis of Police Department data. Investigators in the precinct are saddled with twice the number of cases the department recommends, even as their bosses are called to Police Headquarters to answer for the sharpest crime rise in the city this year. And across the Bronx, investigative resources are squeezed. It has the highest   rate of the city’s five boroughs but the thinnest detective staffing. Nine of the 14   precinct detective squads for violent crime in the city are there. The borough’s robbery squad is smaller than Manhattan’s, even though the Bronx has had 1, 300 more cases this year. And its homicide squad has one detective for every four murders, compared with one detective for roughly every two murders in Upper Manhattan and more than one detective per murder in Lower Manhattan. In   lobbies and   family apartments, outside methadone clinics and art studios, people take note of the inequity. They hear police commanders explain that they lack the resources to place a floodlight on a dangerous block or to post officers at a   corner. They watch witnesses cower behind   doors, more fearful of a gunman’s crew than confident in the Police Department’s ability to protect them. So though people see a lot, they rarely testify. And in the South Bronx, as in so many predominantly black and Hispanic neighborhoods like it in the United States, the contract between the police and the community is in tatters. Some people have stories of crime reports that were ignored, or 911 calls that went unanswered for hours. Others tell of a 911 call for help ending in the caller’s arrest, or of a minor charge leading to 12 hours in a fetid holding cell. This is the paradox of policing in the 40th Precinct. Its neighborhoods have historically been prime targets for aggressive tactics, like    that are designed to ward off disorder. But precinct detectives there have less time than anywhere else in the city to answer for the blood spilled in violent crimes. Gola White, who was beside her daughter when she was shot and killed in a playground this summer, four years after her son was gunned down in the same housing project, ticked off the public safety resources that she said were scant in Bronx neighborhoods like hers: security cameras, lights, locks, investigating police officers. “Here, we have nothing,” she said. When it comes to “  families,” she said, the authorities “don’t really care as much. That’s how I feel. ” The Times has been documenting the murders logged this year in the 40th Precinct, one of a handful of neighborhoods where deadly violence remains a problem in an era of   crime in New York City. The homicides  —   14 in the precinct this year, up from nine in 2015  —   strain detectives, and when they go unsolved, as half of them have this year, some look to take the law into their own hands. From hundreds of conversations with grieving relatives and friends, witnesses and police officers, the social forces that flare into murder in a place like the 40th Precinct become clearer: merciless gang codes, mental illness, drugs and long memories of feuds that simmered out of officers’ view. The reasons some murders will never be solved also emerge: paralyzing fear of retribution, victims carrying secrets to their graves and relentless casework that forces detectives to move on in hopes that a break will come later. Frustrations build on all sides. Detectives’ phones rarely ring with tips, and officers grow embittered with witnesses who will not cooperate. In the meantime, a victim’s friends conduct their own investigations, and talk of grabbing a stash gun from a wheel well or a mother’s apartment when they find their suspect. In the chasm between the police and the community, gangs and gun violence flourish. Parents try to protect their families from drug crews’ threats, and officers work to overcome the residue of years of mistrust and understaffing in communities where they still go racing from one 911 call to the next. The streets around St. Mary’s Park were the scene of two fatal shootings logged in the 40th Precinct this year. Both are unsolved. James Fernandez heard talk of the murders through the door of his   apartment on East 146th Street in a     the Betances Houses. He lived at the end of a long hallway strewn with hypodermic needles, empty dope bags and discarded Hennessy bottles. A   young men who spoke of being in a subset of the Bloods gang had made it their drug market, slinging marijuana and cocaine to regulars, flashing firearms and blowing smoke into the Fernandez apartment. When Mr. Fernandez, 40, asked the young men to move, they answered by busting up his car. This kind of crime, an anachronism in much of New York, still rattles the 40th Precinct, even though murders there have fallen to 14 this year from 83 in 1991. It has more major felony crimes per resident than any other residential district in the city. It is also one of the poorest communities in the country, and many young men find their way into underground markets. Mr. Fernandez was not one to shrink from the threats. When he was growing up on the Lower East Side, he rode his bicycle around to the customers of the drug dealers he worked for and collected payments in a backpack. After leaving that life, he got a tech maintenance job and, three years ago, moved into the Betances Houses with his wife and daughter, now 11. He had two choices to get help with the drug crew: call the police for help and risk being labeled a snitch, or call his old Lower East Side bosses for muscle and risk violence. He chose the police. Again and again, he walked into a local substation, Police Service Area 7, and asked for protection. His daughter was using an inhaler to relieve coughs from the marijuana smoke. Mr. Fernandez and his wife got terrible headaches. “There’s a lot of killers here, and we are going to kill you,” a sergeant’s police report quoted a    telling Mr. Fernandez in August 2015. A second report filed the same day said a    warned him, “I’m going to shoot through your window. ” Mr. Fernandez told the police both the teenagers’ names, which appear in the reports, and then went home. He said one of their friends had seen him walk into the substation, and they tried to intimidate him out of filing another report. Three days later, the same    propped his bike on their door, “then said if I was to open the door and say something, they would body slam me,” Mr. Fernandez’s wife, Maria Fernandez, wrote on slips of paper she used to document the hallway ruckus and the inadequate police response. The boys made comments about how easy a target she was and about how they would have to “slap” her if she opened the door while they made a drug sale, and they threatened to beat the Fernandez family because “they are the ones snitching,” her notes say. But another   complaint at the substation, 10 days after the first, brought no relief. A week later, feeling desperate, Ms. Fernandez tried calling: first to the substation, at 8:50 p. m. when one of the boys blew weed smoke at her door and made a   threat to attack her, and then to 911 at 10:36 p. m. The police never came, she wrote in her notes. She tried the 40th Precinct station house next, but officers at the desk left her standing in the public waiting area for a   she said, making her fear being seen again. Officers put her in worse danger some months later, she said, when they came to her door and announced in front of the teenagers that they were there on a complaint about drug activity. Mr. Fernandez started doing the work that he said the police had failed to do. He wired a camera into his peephole to record the drugs and guns. The footage hark back to the New York of the 1980s, still very much present to some of the precinct’s residents. Around 6:30 each morning, Sgt. Michael J. LoPuzzo walks through the tall wooden doors of the 40th Precinct station house. The cases that land on his metal desk  —   dead bodies with no known cause, strip club brawls, shooting victims hobbling into the hospital themselves  —   bring resistance at every turn, reminding him of an earlier era in the city’s   campaign. “I haven’t got one single phone call that’s putting me in the right direction here,” said Sergeant LoPuzzo, the head of the precinct’s detective squad, one day this summer as he worked on an answer to an email inquiry from a murder victim’s aunt about why the killer had not been caught. “And people just don’t understand that. ” Often it is detectives who most feel the effects of people turning on the police. Witnesses shout them away from their doors just so neighbors know they refuse to talk. Of the 184 people who were shot and wounded in the Bronx through early September, more than a third  —   66 victims  —   refused to cooperate. Over the same period in the 40th Precinct, squad detectives closed three of 17 nonfatal shootings, and 72 of 343 robbery cases. Part of the resistance stems from   preventive policing tactics, like    that were a hallmark of the     style under former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and his police commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly. Near the height of the    strategy, in 2012, the 40th Precinct had the   stops in the city, the   stops in which officers used force and the most frisks. Of 18, 276 stops that year, 15, 521 were of people who had done nothing criminal. The precinct was also one of the   areas that the department flooded with its newest officers. At roll calls, they were pressured to generate numbers: write tickets and make arrests. They had no choice but to give a summons to a young man playing in a park after dark, even if the officers had done the same growing up in the same neighborhood. “I need to bring something in today to justify my existence,” Officer Argenis Rosado, who joined the precinct in 2010, said in an interview at the station house. “So now you’re in a small area, and day after day you’re hammering the same community. Of course that community’s eventually going to turn on you. ” The pressure warped the way officers and residents saw each other. Rookies had to ignore why someone might be drinking outside or sitting on a stoop. “Some of the cops that came out at that time probably viewed the community differently, too,” said Hector Espada, a   veteran of the precinct. “Not because they wanted to, but because they had to. Because some way or somehow, you can’t give someone a $115 summons and feel like you guys could still have a civil conversation after that. ” Morale wilted in the aged station house on Alexander Avenue, in Mott Haven. Officers felt pressure to downgrade crime complaints to make them appear less serious. Several said in interviews that they had overlooked crime reports from immigrants because they were seen as unlikely to complain, and watched supervisors badger victims into repeating their stories in hopes that they would drop their complaints. The practice of downgrading complaints resulted in the disciplining of 19 officers in the precinct last year, one in a string of scandals that has left officers there feeling overscrutinized for problems that also existed elsewhere. Four commanders in the precinct were sent packing in five years, one of them after officers were found to be “ticket fixing,” or forgiving parking tickets for friends, and another after he was recorded giving guidance on whom to stop and frisk: black boys and men, ages 14 to 21. Some officers fled to other commands. Others became reluctant to take assignments in proactive policing units, like   that put them in   situations on the street. “Whenever I walked through the doors of the precinct, to me, it seemed like a black cloud,” said Russell Lewis, a    of the 40th. “It was like a heaviness. When you walked in, all you wanted to do was do your 8 hours 35 minutes and go home, because you didn’t want to get caught up in anything. ” The precinct covers only about two square miles, but the more than a dozen housing projects there mean that it overflows with people. Methadone clinics draw addicts from around the city.   lofts on the southern edge of the precinct presage a wave of gentrification. Even as the Police Department has hired 1, 300 more officers for neighborhood policing and counterterrorism, officers in the 40th Precinct said they could still rush to 25 911 calls during a shift  —   a number unchanged from what the new police commissioner, James P. O’Neill, said he was handling in a similar South Bronx precinct 15 years ago. Several dozen calls at a time can be waiting for a response. Residents know that if you want the police for a domestic problem, it helps to hint that there is a weapon. Last year, the precinct drew the   number of civilian complaints for officer misconduct in the city, and the most lawsuits stemming from police actions. The precinct is trying to improve morale under a new commanding officer, Deputy Inspector Brian Hennessy. A cadre of what the department calls neighborhood coordination officers has been on patrol since last January, part of a citywide effort under Mr. O’Neill and Mayor Bill de Blasio to bring back the beat cop, unencumbered by chasing every last 911 call, who can listen to people’s concerns and help with investigations. The precinct has made among the most gun arrests in the city, and officers said they now had more discretion to resolve encounters without a summons or an arrest. At one corner near a school, on Courtlandt Avenue and East 151st Street, that has long spawned complaints about gunfire and fights, Inspector Hennessy and some of his officers painted over graffiti and swept up drug paraphernalia this summer. People said it was the first answer to their complaints in years. But the inspector acknowledged that the residue of   policing lingers. “That perception really sticks,” he said. The workload in the 40th Precinct is startling and reveals a gap in how detective squads are equipped to answer violent crime in Manhattan compared with the Bronx, Brooklyn and Queens. Three of the precinct’s 16 detectives are carrying more than 400 cases each this year, and many others have loads in the high 300s, even though the department advises 150 in violent precincts. When they are assigned a homicide, they typically have four days to investigate before dealing with other cases. Quieter precincts can give detectives a month with little distraction to investigate a murder. Detectives in the 40th Precinct have each handled an average of 79 violent felonies this year through    —   murders, rapes, felony assaults and robberies. By contrast, a detective in the precinct on the southern end of Staten Island carries nine such cases a detective in the precinct patrolling Union Square and Gramercy Park handles 16 and a detective in the precinct for most of Washington Heights handles 32, the citywide median. Last year, the 40th was the    for violent crime, with 65 cases per detective. In the Bronx as a whole, a precinct detective has carried an average of 58 violent felonies this year, compared with 27 in Manhattan, 37 in Brooklyn, 38 in Queens and 25 on Staten Island. Rape cases and robbery patterns are later sent to more specialized units, but precinct detectives do extensive initial work to interview victims, write reports and process evidence. Precincts in much of Manhattan, which are whiter and wealthier than the South Bronx, often have more property felonies, like stolen laptops or credit cards, and the police say those can be complex. But even accounting for those crimes, the 40th Precinct has some of the heaviest caseloads of overall crime per detective in the city. Michael Palladino, the head of the Detectives’ Endowment Association and a former Bronx officer, said staffing disparities affected the department’s efforts to build trust in communities like the South Bronx. Witnesses make a calculation, he said: “If I cooperate with the detectives, there’s so much work, there’s so few of them there, they won’t even get the chance to protect me, or they’ll be there too late when the retaliation comes. ” Sergeant LoPuzzo, who turned down a more prestigious post to stay in the 40th Precinct, said that his squad worked tirelessly to handle cases with the people he had, and that while every squad wanted more detectives, staffing needs for counterterrorism units and task forces had created new deployment challenges across the department. “We fight with the army we have, not the army we wish we had,” he said. Details of how the Police Department assigns its 36, 000 officers are closely held and constantly in flux, and the public has minimal information on how personnel are allocated. Presented with The Times’s analysis of confidential staffing data, the department’s chief of detectives, Robert K. Boyce, vowed to send more detectives to the 40th Precinct and said the department would reassess its deployment more broadly in troubled precincts. He said a recent decision to bring gang, narcotics and vice detectives under his command made it easier to shift personnel. Chief Boyce said the burdens on detectives went beyond felony crimes to include   and   cases. And he noted the support that precinct squads got from centralized units focusing on robberies, gangs or grand larcenies, for example. Major crime keeps pounding the 40th Precinct, at rates that in 2015 were only a tenth of a percent lower than in 2001, even as citywide crime dropped by more than a third over the same period. But the precinct’s detective squad shrank by about eight investigators during those years, according to staffing data obtained from the City Council through a Freedom of Information Law request. The squad covering Union Square and Gramercy Park, where crime dropped by a third over that period, grew by about 11 investigators. (The 40th Precinct was given an additional detective and four   investigators this summer, when it was already missing three detectives for illness or other reasons.) Retired detectives are skeptical that community relations alone can drive down crime in the city’s last “” the busiest precincts. Rather, they say, the Police Department should be dedicating more resources to providing the same sort of robust investigative response that seems standard in Manhattan. “Any crime in Manhattan has to be solved,” said Howard Landesberg, who was a 40th Precinct detective in the late 1980s. “The outer boroughs are, like, forgotten. ” Retired detectives said that understaffing made it harder to solve crimes in the Bronx, Brooklyn and Queens, where the higher prevalence of gang and drug killings already saddled investigators with cases in which people were not inclined to cooperate. Through   detectives had closed 67 percent of homicides in Manhattan and 76 percent of those in Staten Island this year, compared with 54 percent of those in the Bronx, 42 percent of those in Queens and 31 percent of those in Brooklyn. Of last year’s homicides, detectives cleared 71 percent in Manhattan, 63 percent in the Bronx, 62 percent in Queens, 57 percent in Staten Island and 31 percent in Brooklyn. “It’s the culture of the Police Department that they worry about Manhattan,” said Joseph L. Giacalone, a former sergeant in the Bronx Cold Case Squad, in part “because that’s where the money is. ” He added: “When de Blasio came in, he talked about the tale of two cities. And then he’s done the complete opposite of what he said. It’s just business as usual. ” The Bronx’s struggles extend into prosecutions. In each of the last five years, prosecutors in the Bronx have declined to prosecute violent felony cases more than anywhere else in the city. And the rate of conviction in the Bronx is routinely the lowest in the city as well, but has ticked up this year to surpass Brooklyn’s rate through November as Bronx prosecutors work to streamline cases. Some cases have become even more difficult to win because of the   problem in the 40th Precinct, which has allowed defense lawyers to attack the credibility of officers who were implicated, said Patrice O’Shaughnessy, a spokeswoman for the Bronx District Attorney’s office. The district attorney, Darcel D. Clark, elected in 2015, said in a statement, “I was a judge here in the Bronx, and I heard from jurors that they can’t be impartial because they don’t trust the police. ” Against that tide of mistrust, Sergeant LoPuzzo’s detectives work 36 hours straight on some fresh cases. They buy Chinese takeout with their own money for a murder suspect. They carry surveillance videos home in hopes that their personal computers may enhance them better than a squad computer. They buy an urn for a homeless mother who has her murdered son’s ashes in a box. In the months after a killing, they can seem like the only people in this glittering city who are paying attention to the 40th Precinct’s homicide victims. Newly fatherless children go back to school without a therapist’s help. Victims’ families wander confused through a courthouse and nearly miss an appearance. Newspapers largely ignore killings of people with criminal pasts, pushing them down the priority lists of the   chiefs at Police Headquarters. In a stuffy   squad room, the detectives of the 40th Precinct grapple with an inheritance of government neglect. They meet mothers who believe their sons might never have been murdered had a city guidance counselor listened to pleas to help them stay enrolled, or had a city housing worker fixed the locks or lights on a building. And the detectives work alongside a vicious system on the streets for punishing police cooperators. Young men scan court paperwork in prison, looking for the names of people who turned on them. One murder victim in the precinct this year was cast out of his crew after he avoided being arrested with them in a gang takedown some believed he was cooperating. A longtime 40th Precinct detective, Jeff Meenagh, said a witness in a homicide case was going to testify until he went back to his neighborhood and was told that anyone who testified would “get what you deserve. ” The allies Sergeant LoPuzzo makes are friendly only for so long. He helped clear a woman’s son of a robbery charge by locating surveillance video that proved he was not the robber. The mother started calling with tips under a code name  —   about a gun under a car, for example. But she always refused to testify. And she cut ties this year after Sergeant LoPuzzo arrested her son in the stabbing of two people and her   in a shooting. New York City owns East 146th Street and the   buildings on each side. But James Fernandez, in the Betances Houses, said the reality on the ground was different: The drug boss ran the block. By October, Mr. Fernandez was increasingly afraid  —   and fed up. Mr. Fernandez and his wife went so far as to give officers keys to the building door, so they could get in whenever they wanted, showed them the videos and offered them   access to his camera so they could see what was happening in the hallway. A couple of officers said they needed a supervisor’s permission to do more. Others answered that the young men were only making threats. Officers occasionally stopped outside their building, causing the young men to scatter, but did not come inside, Mr. Fernandez said. The menacing worsened. Mr. Fernandez’s daughter was harassed as she arrived home from school. She grew more and more distressed, and her parents had her start seeing a therapist. Mr. Fernandez made several complaints at the office of the borough president, Ruben Diaz Jr. and visited a victim’s advocate in the district attorney’s office. On Oct. 20, 2015, he sent an online note to the police commissioner’s office. “We went to all proper channels for help,” the note said. “Both precincts failed us, except 2 officers who helped us, but their hands are tied. No one else to turn to. I have months of video of multiple crimes taking place and we are in extreme danger. ” “40th and PSA 7 won’t do anything,” he wrote, referring to the local substation. “Please we need to speak to some one with authority. ” The local substation commander, Deputy Inspector Jerry O’Sullivan, and the Bronx narcotics unit were alerted to the complaints. But Mr. Fernandez said he never heard from them. So he relied on his own street instincts to protect his family. He made pleas to a man he thought was employing the dealers in the hallway. The activity quieted briefly, but it returned after the young men rented a room in a woman’s apartment upstairs. Mr. Fernandez approached a different man who he learned was the boss of the operation. The man agreed to ask the dealers to calm down. He even hired a drug customer to sweep the hallway, Mr. Fernandez said. But two weeks later, the dealing and the harassment resumed. So he went to his old Lower East Side bosses, who hired men to trail his wife and daughter on their way out of the building and make sure they made it safely to school. At other times they sat outside the Betances Houses. He also bought two bulletproof vests, for about $700 each. He could not find one small enough for his daughter. “I have no faith in the City of New York, I have no faith in the police, I have no faith in the politicians,” Mr. Fernandez said. “The only thing I know for sure: God, if we’re in a situation again, I will be left to defend my family. ” Paying such close attention to what was happening in the hallway, Mr. Fernandez said he learned some details about two recent homicides that the 40th Precinct was investigating. But because his calls for help were going nowhere, he said he decided not to put himself in greater risk by talking: He would not tell the police what he had learned. “I’m bending over backward, and nobody’s not even doing anything,” he said. “Why am I going to help you, if you ain’t going to help me?” By last January, a new neighborhood coordination officer was working with residents of the Betances Houses, and ended up with the most arrests in his housing command, Inspector O’Sullivan said. Chief Boyce said that the silos in which gang and narcotics detectives used to work made responding to complaints more difficult, but that the recent restructuring would remove those obstacles. “No one should live like Mr. Fernandez lived, with people dealing drugs outside of his apartment,” he said. Mr. Fernandez’s complaints did not spur any arrests, but two men from the hallway were caught separately this year in shootings. One of them, whom Mr. Fernandez named in a police report, was charged this summer with hitting an officer with a metal folding chair and firing three gunshots into a crowd, court papers say. He is being held on Rikers Island on an attempted murder charge. That was too late for Mr. Fernandez. By May, he had moved his family away.

0 - WASHINGTON  —   When Special Agent Adrian Hawkins of the Federal Bureau of Investigation called the Democratic National Committee in September 2015 to pass along some troubling news about its computer network, he was transferred, naturally, to the help desk. His message was brief, if alarming. At least one computer system belonging to the D. N. C. had been compromised by hackers federal investigators had named “the Dukes,” a cyberespionage team linked to the Russian government. The F. B. I. knew it well: The bureau had spent the last few years trying to kick the Dukes out of the unclassified email systems of the White House, the State Department and even the Joint Chiefs of Staff, one of the government’s   networks. Yared Tamene, the   contractor at the D. N. C. who fielded the call, was no expert in cyberattacks. His first moves were to check Google for “the Dukes” and conduct a cursory search of the D. N. C. computer system logs to look for hints of such a cyberintrusion. By his own account, he did not look too hard even after Special Agent Hawkins called back repeatedly over the next several weeks  —   in part because he wasn’t certain the caller was a real F. B. I. agent and not an impostor. “I had no way of differentiating the call I just received from a prank call,” Mr. Tamene wrote in an internal memo, obtained by The New York Times, that detailed his contact with the F. B. I. It was the cryptic first sign of a cyberespionage and   campaign devised to disrupt the 2016 presidential election, the first such attempt by a foreign power in American history. What started as an   operation, intelligence officials believe, ultimately morphed into an effort to harm one candidate, Hillary Clinton, and tip the election to her opponent, Donald J. Trump. Like another famous American election scandal, it started with a   at the D. N. C. The first time, 44 years ago at the committee’s old offices in the Watergate complex, the burglars planted listening devices and jimmied a filing cabinet. This time, the burglary was conducted from afar, directed by the Kremlin, with   emails and zeros and ones. An examination by The Times of the Russian operation  —   based on interviews with dozens of players targeted in the attack, intelligence officials who investigated it and Obama administration officials who deliberated over the best response  —   reveals a series of missed signals, slow responses and a continuing underestimation of the seriousness of the cyberattack. The D. N. C. ’s fumbling encounter with the F. B. I. meant the best chance to halt the Russian intrusion was lost. The failure to grasp the scope of the attacks undercut efforts to minimize their impact. And the White House’s reluctance to respond forcefully meant the Russians have not paid a heavy price for their actions, a decision that could prove critical in deterring future cyberattacks. The   approach of the F. B. I. meant that Russian hackers could roam freely through the committee’s network for nearly seven months before top D. N. C. officials were alerted to the attack and hired cyberexperts to protect their systems. In the meantime, the hackers moved on to targets outside the D. N. C. including Mrs. Clinton’s campaign chairman, John D. Podesta, whose private email account was hacked months later. Even Mr. Podesta, a savvy Washington insider who had written a 2014 report on cyberprivacy for President Obama, did not truly understand the gravity of the hacking. By last summer, Democrats watched in helpless fury as their private emails and confidential documents appeared online day after day  —   procured by Russian intelligence agents, posted on WikiLeaks and other websites, then eagerly reported on by the American media, including The Times. Mr. Trump gleefully cited many of the purloined emails on the campaign trail. The fallout included the resignations of Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz of Florida, the chairwoman of the D. N. C. and most of her top party aides. Leading Democrats were sidelined at the height of the campaign, silenced by revelations of embarrassing emails or consumed by the scramble to deal with the hacking. Though   by the public, confidential documents taken by the Russian hackers from the D. N. C. ’s sister organization, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, turned up in congressional races in a dozen states, tainting some of them with accusations of scandal. In recent days, a skeptical   the nation’s intelligence agencies and the two major parties have become embroiled in an extraordinary public dispute over what evidence exists that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia moved beyond mere espionage to deliberately try to subvert American democracy and pick the winner of the presidential election. Many of Mrs. Clinton’s closest aides believe that the Russian assault had a profound impact on the election, while conceding that other factors  —   Mrs. Clinton’s weaknesses as a candidate her private email server the public statements of the F. B. I. director, James B. Comey, about her handling of classified information  —   were also important. While there’s no way to be certain of the ultimate impact of the hack, this much is clear: A     weapon that Russia had   in elections from Ukraine to Europe was trained on the United States, with devastating effectiveness. For Russia, with an enfeebled economy and a nuclear arsenal it cannot use short of   war, cyberpower proved the perfect weapon: cheap, hard to see coming, hard to trace. “There shouldn’t be any doubt in anybody’s mind,” Adm. Michael S. Rogers, the director of the National Security Agency and commander of United States Cyber Command, said at a postelection conference. “This was not something that was done casually, this was not something that was done by chance, this was not a target that was selected purely arbitrarily,” he said. “This was a conscious effort by a   to attempt to achieve a specific effect. ” For the people whose emails were stolen, this new form of political sabotage has left a trail of shock and professional damage. Neera Tanden, president of the Center for American Progress and a key Clinton supporter, recalls walking into the busy Clinton transition offices, humiliated to see her face on television screens as pundits discussed a leaked email in which she had called Mrs. Clinton’s instincts “suboptimal. ” “It was just a sucker punch to the gut every day,” Ms. Tanden said. “It was the worst professional experience of my life. ” The United States, too, has carried out cyberattacks, and in decades past the C. I. A. tried to subvert foreign elections. But the Russian attack is increasingly understood across the political spectrum as an ominous historic landmark  —   with one notable exception: Mr. Trump has rejected the findings of the intelligence agencies he will soon oversee as “ridiculous,” insisting that the hacker may be American, or Chinese, but that “they have no idea. ” Mr. Trump cited the reported disagreements between the agencies about whether Mr. Putin intended to help elect him. On Tuesday, a Russian government spokesman echoed Mr. Trump’s scorn. “This tale of ‘hacks’ resembles a banal brawl between American security officials over spheres of influence,” Maria Zakharova, the spokeswoman for the Russian Foreign Ministry, wrote on Facebook. Over the weekend, four prominent senators  —   two Republicans and two Democrats  —   joined forces to pledge an investigation while pointedly ignoring Mr. Trump’s skeptical claims. “Democrats and Republicans must work together, and across the jurisdictional lines of the Congress, to examine these recent incidents thoroughly and devise comprehensive solutions to deter and defend against further cyberattacks,” said Senators John McCain, Lindsey Graham, Chuck Schumer and Jack Reed. “This cannot become a partisan issue,” they said. “The stakes are too high for our country. ” Sitting in the basement of the Democratic National Committee headquarters, below a   2012 portrait of a smiling Barack Obama, is a   filing cabinet missing the handle on the bottom drawer. Only a framed newspaper story hanging on the wall hints at the importance of this aged piece of office furniture. “GOP Security Aide Among 5 Arrested in Bugging Affair,” reads the headline from the front page of The Washington Post on June 19, 1972, with the bylines of Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein. Andrew Brown, 37, the technology director at the D. N. C. was born after that famous  . But as he began to plan for this year’s election cycle, he was well aware that the D. N. C. could become a   target again. There were aspirations to ensure that the D. N. C. was well protected against cyberintruders  —   and then there was the reality, Mr. Brown and his bosses at the organization acknowledged: The D. N. C. was a nonprofit group, dependent on donations, with a fraction of the security budget that a corporation its size would have. “There was never enough money to do everything we needed to do,” Mr. Brown said. The D. N. C. had a standard email   service, intended to block phishing attacks and malware created to resemble legitimate email. But when Russian hackers started in on the D. N. C. the committee did not have the most advanced systems in place to track suspicious traffic, internal D. N. C. memos show. Mr. Tamene, who reports to Mr. Brown and fielded the call from the F. B. I. agent, was not a   D. N. C. employee he works for a   contracting firm called The MIS Department. He was left to figure out, largely on his own, how to respond  —   and even whether the man who had called in to the D. N. C. switchboard was really an F. B. I. agent. “The F. B. I. thinks the D. N. C. has at least one compromised computer on its network and the F. B. I. wanted to know if the D. N. C. is aware, and if so, what the D. N. C. is doing about it,” Mr. Tamene wrote in an internal memo about his contacts with the F. B. I. He added that “the Special Agent told me to look for a specific type of malware dubbed ‘Dukes’ by the U. S. intelligence community and in cybersecurity circles. ” Part of the problem was that Special Agent Hawkins did not show up in person at the D. N. C. Nor could he email anyone there, as that risked alerting the hackers that the F. B. I. knew they were in the system. Mr. Tamene’s initial scan of the D. N. C. system  —   using his    tools and incomplete targeting information from the F. B. I.  —   found nothing. So when Special Agent Hawkins called repeatedly in October, leaving voice mail messages for Mr. Tamene, urging him to call back, “I did not return his calls, as I had nothing to report,” Mr. Tamene explained in his memo. In November, Special Agent Hawkins called with more ominous news. A D. N. C. computer was “calling home, where home meant Russia,” Mr. Tamene’s memo says, referring to software sending information to Moscow. “SA Hawkins added that the F. B. I. thinks that this calling home behavior could be the result of a   attack. ” Mr. Brown knew that Mr. Tamene, who declined to comment, was fielding calls from the F. B. I. But he was tied up on a different problem: evidence suggesting that the campaign of Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, Mrs. Clinton’s main Democratic opponent, had improperly gained access to her campaign data. Ms. Wasserman Schultz, then the D. N. C. ’s chairwoman, and Amy Dacey, then its chief executive, said in interviews that neither of them was notified about the early reports that the committee’s system had likely been compromised. Shawn Henry, who once led the F. B. I. ’s cyber division and is now president of CrowdStrike Services, the cybersecurity firm retained by the D. N. C. in April, said he was baffled that the F. B. I. did not call a more senior official at the D. N. C. or send an agent in person to the party headquarters to try to force a more vigorous response. “We are not talking about an office that is in the middle of the woods of Montana,” Mr. Henry said. “We are talking about an office that is half a mile from the F. B. I. office that is getting the notification. ” “This is not a    delicatessen or a local library. This is a critical piece of the U. S. infrastructure because it relates to our electoral process, our elected officials, our legislative process, our executive process,” he added. “To me it is a   serious issue, and if after a couple of months you don’t see any results, somebody ought to raise that to a higher level. ” The F. B. I. declined to comment on the agency’s handling of the hack. “The F. B. I. takes very seriously any compromise of public and private sector systems,” it said in a statement, adding that agents “will continue to share information” to help targets “safeguard their systems against the actions of persistent cybercriminals. ” By March, Mr. Tamene and his team had met at least twice in person with the F. B. I. and concluded that Agent Hawkins was really a federal employee. But then the situation took a dire turn. A second team of   hackers began to target the D. N. C. and other players in the political world, particularly Democrats. Billy Rinehart, a former D. N. C. regional field director who was then working for Mrs. Clinton’s campaign, got an odd email warning from Google. “Someone just used your password to try to sign into your Google account,” the March 22 email said, adding that the   attempt had occurred in Ukraine. “Google stopped this   attempt. You should change your password immediately. ” Mr. Rinehart was in Hawaii at the time. He remembers checking his email at 4 a. m. for messages from East Coast associates. Without thinking much about the notification, he clicked on the “change password” button and half asleep, as best he can remember, he typed in a new password. What he did not know until months later is that he had just given the Russian hackers access to his email account. Hundreds of similar phishing emails were being sent to American political targets, including an identical email sent on March 19 to Mr. Podesta, chairman of the Clinton campaign. Given how many emails Mr. Podesta received through this personal email account, several aides also had access to it, and one of them noticed the warning email, sending it to a computer technician to make sure it was legitimate before anyone clicked on the “change password” button. “This is a legitimate email,” Charles Delavan, a Clinton campaign aide, replied to another of Mr. Podesta’s aides, who had noticed the alert. “John needs to change his password immediately. ” With another click, a decade of emails that Mr. Podesta maintained in his Gmail account  —   a total of about 60, 000  —   were unlocked for the Russian hackers. Mr. Delavan, in an interview, said that his bad advice was a result of a typo: He knew this was a phishing attack, as the campaign was getting dozens of them. He said he had meant to type that it was an “illegitimate” email, an error that he said has plagued him ever since. During this second wave, the hackers also gained access to the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, and then, through a virtual private network connection, to the main computer network of the D. N. C. The F. B. I. observed this surge of activity as well, again reaching out to Mr. Tamene to warn him. Yet Mr. Tamene still saw no reason to be alarmed: He found copies of the phishing emails in the D. N. C. ’s spam filter. But he had no reason, he said, to believe that the computer systems had been infiltrated. One bit of progress had finally been made by the middle of April: The D. N. C. seven months after it had first been warned, finally installed a “robust set of monitoring tools,” Mr. Tamene’s internal memo says. The United States had two decades of warning that Russia’s intelligence agencies were trying to break into America’s most sensitive computer networks. But the Russians have always managed to stay a step ahead. Their first major attack was detected on Oct. 7, 1996, when a computer operator at the Colorado School of Mines discovered some nighttime computer activity he could not explain. The school had a major contract with the Navy, and the operator warned his contacts there. But as happened two decades later at the D. N. C. at first “everyone was unable to connect the dots,” said Thomas Rid, a scholar at King’s College in London who has studied the attack. Investigators gave it a name  —   Moonlight Maze  —   and spent two years, often working day and night, tracing how it hopped from the Navy to the Department of Energy to the Air Force and NASA. In the end, they concluded that the total number of files stolen, if printed and stacked, would be taller than the Washington Monument. Whole weapons designs were flowing out the door, and it was a first taste of what was to come: an escalating campaign of cyberattacks around the world. But for years, the Russians stayed largely out of the headlines, thanks to the Chinese  —   who took bigger risks, and often got caught. They stole the designs for the   fighter jet, corporate secrets for rolling steel, even the blueprints for gas pipelines that supply much of the United States. And during the 2008 presidential election cycle, Chinese intelligence hacked into the campaigns of Mr. Obama and Mr. McCain, making off with internal position papers and communications. But they didn’t publish any of it. The Russians had not gone away, of course. “They were just a lot more stealthy,” said Kevin Mandia, a former Air Force intelligence officer who spent most of his days fighting off Russian cyberattacks before founding Mandiant, a cybersecurity firm that is now a division of FireEye  —   and the company the Clinton campaign brought in to secure its own systems. The Russians were also quicker to turn their attacks to political purposes. A 2007 cyberattack on Estonia, a former Soviet republic that had joined NATO, sent a message that Russia could paralyze the country without invading it. The next year cyberattacks were used during Russia’s war with Georgia. But American officials did not imagine that the Russians would dare try those techniques inside the United States. They were largely focused on preventing what former Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta warned was an approaching “cyber Pearl Harbor”  —   a shutdown of the power grid or cellphone networks. But in 2014 and 2015, a Russian hacking group began systematically targeting the State Department, the White House and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. “Each time, they eventually met with some form of success,” Michael Sulmeyer, a former cyberexpert for the secretary of defense, and Ben Buchanan, now both of the Harvard Cyber Security Project, wrote recently in a    published paper for the Carnegie Endowment. The Russians grew stealthier and stealthier, tricking government computers into sending out data while disguising the electronic “command and control” messages that set off alarms for anyone looking for malicious actions. The State Department was so crippled that it repeatedly closed its systems to throw out the intruders. At one point, officials traveling to Vienna with Secretary of State John Kerry for the Iran nuclear negotiations had to set up commercial Gmail accounts just to communicate with one another and with reporters traveling with them. Mr. Obama was briefed regularly on all this, but he made a decision that many in the White House now regret: He did not name Russians publicly, or issue sanctions. There was always a reason: fear of escalating a cyberwar, and concern that the United States needed Russia’s cooperation in negotiations over Syria. “We’d have all these circular meetings,” one senior State Department official said, “in which everyone agreed you had to push back at the Russians and push back hard. But it didn’t happen. ” So the Russians escalated again  —   breaking into systems not just for espionage, but to publish or broadcast what they found, known as “doxing” in the cyberworld. It was a brazen change in tactics, moving the Russians from espionage to influence operations. In February 2014, they broadcast an intercepted phone call between Victoria Nuland, the assistant secretary of state who handles Russian affairs and has a contentious relationship with Mr. Putin, and Geoffrey Pyatt, the United States ambassador to Ukraine. Ms. Nuland was heard describing a   American effort to broker a deal in Ukraine, then in political turmoil. They were not the only ones on whom the Russians used the    strategy. The Open Society Foundation, run by George Soros, was a major target, and when its documents were released, some turned out to have been altered to make it appear as if the foundation was financing Russian opposition members. Last year, the attacks became more aggressive. Russia hacked a major French television station, frying critical hardware. Around Christmas, it attacked part of the power grid in Ukraine, dropping a portion of the country into darkness, killing backup generators and taking control of generators. In retrospect, it was a warning shot. The attacks “were not fully integrated military operations,” Mr. Sulmeyer said. But they showed an increasing boldness. The day before the White House Correspondents’ Association dinner in April, Ms. Dacey, the D. N. C. ’s chief executive, was preparing for a night of parties when she got an urgent phone call. With the new monitoring system in place, Mr. Tamene had examined administrative logs of the D. N. C. ’s computer system and found something very suspicious: An unauthorized person, with   security status, had gained access to the D. N. C. ’s computers. “Not sure it is related to what the F. B. I. has been noticing,” said one internal D. N. C. email sent on April 29. “The D. N. C. may have been hacked in a serious way this week, with password theft, etc. ” No one knew just how bad the breach was  —   but it was clear that a lot more than a single filing cabinet worth of materials might have been taken. A secret committee was immediately created, including Ms. Dacey, Ms. Wasserman Schultz, Mr. Brown and Michael Sussmann, a former cybercrimes prosecutor at the Department of Justice who now works at Perkins Coie, the Washington law firm that handles D. N. C. political matters. “Three most important questions,” Mr. Sussmann wrote to his clients the night the   was confirmed. “1) What data was accessed? 2) How was it done? 3) How do we stop it?” Mr. Sussmann instructed his clients not to use D. N. C. email because they had just one opportunity to lock the hackers out  —   an effort that could be foiled if the hackers knew that the D. N. C. was on to them. “You only get one chance to raise the drawbridge,” Mr. Sussmann said. “If the adversaries know you are aware of their presence, they will take steps to burrow in, or erase the logs that show they were present. ” The D. N. C. immediately hired CrowdStrike, a cybersecurity firm, to scan its computers, identify the intruders and build a new computer and telephone system from scratch. Within a day, CrowdStrike confirmed that the intrusion had originated in Russia, Mr. Sussmann said. The work that such companies do is a computer version of   crime scene investigation, with fingerprints, bullet casings and DNA swabs replaced by an electronic trail that can be just as incriminating. And just as police detectives learn to identify the telltale methods of a veteran burglar, so CrowdStrike investigators recognized the distinctive handiwork of Cozy Bear and Fancy Bear. Those are CrowdStrike’s nicknames for the two Russian hacking groups that the firm found at work inside the D. N. C. network. Cozy Bear  —   the group also known as the Dukes or A. P. T. 29, for “advanced persistent threat”  —   may or may not be associated with the F. S. B. the main successor to the   K. G. B. but it is widely believed to be a Russian government operation. It made its first appearance in 2014, said Dmitri Alperovitch, CrowdStrike’s   and chief technology officer. It was Cozy Bear, CrowdStrike concluded, that first penetrated the D. N. C. in the summer of 2015, by sending   emails to a long list of American government agencies, Washington nonprofits and government contractors. Whenever someone clicked on a phishing message, the Russians would enter the network, “exfiltrate” documents of interest and stockpile them for intelligence purposes. “Once they got into the D. N. C. they found the data valuable and decided to continue the operation,” said Mr. Alperovitch, who was born in Russia and moved to the United States as a teenager. Only in March 2016 did Fancy Bear show up  —   first penetrating the computers of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, and then jumping to the D. N. C. investigators believe. Fancy Bear, sometimes called A. P. T. 28 and believed to be directed by the G. R. U. Russia’s military intelligence agency, is an older outfit, tracked by Western investigators for nearly a decade. It was Fancy Bear that got hold of Mr. Podesta’s email. Attribution, as the skill of identifying a cyberattacker is known, is more art than science. It is often impossible to name an attacker with absolute certainty. But over time, by accumulating a reference library of hacking techniques and targets, it is possible to spot repeat offenders. Fancy Bear, for instance, has gone after military and political targets in Ukraine and Georgia, and at NATO installations. That largely rules out cybercriminals and most countries, Mr. Alperovitch said. “There’s no plausible actor that has an interest in all those victims other than Russia,” he said. Another clue: The Russian hacking groups tended to be active during working hours in the Moscow time zone. To their astonishment, Mr. Alperovitch said, CrowdStrike experts found signs that the two Russian hacking groups had not coordinated their attacks. Fancy Bear, apparently not knowing that Cozy Bear had been rummaging in D. N. C. files for months, took many of the same documents. In the six weeks after CrowdStrike’s arrival, in total secrecy, the computer system at the D. N. C. was replaced. For a weekend, email and phones were shut off employees were told it was a system upgrade. All laptops were turned in and the hard drives wiped clean, with the uninfected information on them imaged to new drives. Though D. N. C. officials had learned that the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee had been infected, too, they did not notify their sister organization, which was in the same building, because they were afraid that it would leak. All of this work took place as the bitter contest for the Democratic nomination continued to play out between Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Sanders, and it was already causing a major distraction for Ms. Wasserman Schultz and the D. N. C. ’s chief executive. “This was not a bump in the road  —   bumps in the road happen all the time,” she said in an interview. “Two different Russian spy agencies had hacked into our network and stolen our property. And we did not yet know what they had taken. But we knew they had very broad access to our network. There was a tremendous amount of uncertainty. And it was chilling. ” The D. N. C. executives and their lawyer had their first formal meeting with senior F. B. I. officials in   nine months after the bureau’s first call to the   contractor. Among the early requests at that meeting, according to participants: that the federal government make a quick “attribution” formally blaming actors with ties to Russian government for the attack to make clear that it was not routine hacking but foreign espionage. “You have a presidential election underway here and you know that the Russians have hacked into the D. N. C. ,” Mr. Sussmann said, recalling the message to the F. B. I. “We need to tell the American public that. And soon. ” In   on Mr. Sussmann’s advice, D. N. C. leaders decided to take a bold step. Concerned that word of the hacking might leak, they decided to go public in The Washington Post with the news that the committee had been attacked. That way, they figured, they could get ahead of the story, win a little sympathy from voters for being victimized by Russian hackers and refocus on the campaign. But the very next day, a new, deeply unsettling shock awaited them. Someone calling himself Guccifer 2. 0 appeared on the web, claiming to be the D. N. C. hacker  —   and he posted a confidential committee document detailing Mr. Trump’s record and half a dozen other documents to prove his bona fides. “And it’s just a tiny part of all docs I downloaded from the Democrats networks,” he wrote. Then something more ominous: “The main part of the papers, thousands of files and mails, I gave to WikiLeaks. They will publish them soon. ” It was bad enough that Russian hackers had been spying inside the committee’s network for months. Now the public release of documents had turned a conventional espionage operation into something far more menacing: political sabotage, an unpredictable, uncontrollable menace for Democratic campaigns. Guccifer 2. 0 borrowed the moniker of an earlier hacker, a Romanian who called himself Guccifer and was jailed for breaking into the personal computers of former President George W. Bush, former Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and other notables. This new attacker seemed intent on showing that the D. N. C. ’s cyberexperts at CrowdStrike were wrong to blame Russia. Guccifer 2. 0 called himself a “lone hacker” and mocked CrowdStrike for calling the attackers “sophisticated. ” But online investigators quickly undercut his story. On a whim, Lorenzo   a writer for Motherboard, the tech and culture site of Vice, tried to contact Guccifer 2. 0 by direct message on Twitter. “Surprisingly, he answered right away,” Mr.   said. But whoever was on the other end seemed to be mocking him. “I asked him why he did it, and he said he wanted to expose the Illuminati. He called himself a Gucci lover. And he said he was Romanian. ” That gave Mr.   an idea. Using Google Translate, he sent the purported hacker some questions in Romanian. The answers came back in Romanian. But when he was offline, Mr.   checked with a couple of native speakers, who told him Guccifer 2. 0 had apparently been using Google Translate as well  —   and was clearly not the Romanian he claimed to be. Cyberresearchers found other clues pointing to Russia. Microsoft Word documents posted by Guccifer 2. 0 had been edited by someone calling himself, in Russian, Felix Edmundovich  —   an obvious nom de guerre honoring the founder of the Soviet secret police, Felix Edmundovich Dzerzhinsky. Bad links in the texts were marked by warnings in Russian, generated by what was clearly a   version of Word. When Mr.   managed to engage Guccifer 2. 0 over a period of weeks, he found that his interlocutor’s tone and manner changed. “At first he was careless and colloquial. Weeks later, he was curt and more calculating,” he said. “It seemed like a group of people, and a very sloppy attempt to cover up. ” Computer experts drew the same conclusion about DCLeaks. com, a site that sprang up in June, claiming to be the work of “hacktivists” but posting more stolen documents. It, too, seemed to be a clumsy front for the same Russians who had stolen the documents. Notably, the website was registered in April, suggesting that the Russian hacking team planned well in advance to make public what it stole. In addition to what Guccifer 2. 0 published on his site, he provided material directly on request to some bloggers and publications. The steady flow of Guccifer 2. 0 documents constantly undercut Democratic messaging efforts. On July 6, 12 days before the Republican National Convention began in Cleveland, Guccifer released the D. N. C. ’s battle plan and budget for countering it. For Republican operatives, it was insider gold. Then WikiLeaks, a far more established outlet, began to publish the hacked material  —   just as Guccifer 2. 0 had promised. On July 22, three days before the start of the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia, WikiLeaks dumped out 44, 053 D. N. C. emails with 17, 761 attachments. Some of the messages made clear that some D. N. C. officials favored Mrs. Clinton over her progressive challenger, Mr. Sanders. That was no shock Mr. Sanders, after all, had been an independent socialist, not a Democrat, during his long career in Congress, while Mrs. Clinton had been one of the party’s stars for decades. But the emails, some of them crude or insulting, infuriated Sanders delegates as they arrived in Philadelphia. Ms. Wasserman Schultz resigned under pressure on the eve of the convention where she had planned to preside. Mr. Trump, by now the Republican nominee, expressed delight at the continuing jolts to his opponent, and he began to use Twitter and his stump speeches to highlight the WikiLeaks releases. On July 25, he sent out a lighthearted tweet: “The new joke in town,” he wrote, “is that Russia leaked the disastrous D. N. C.   which should never have been written (stupid) because Putin likes me. ” But WikiLeaks was far from finished. On Oct. 7, a month before the election, the site began the serial publication of thousands of private emails to and from Mr. Podesta, Mrs. Clinton’s campaign manager. The same day, the United States formally accused the Russian government of being behind the hackings, in a joint statement by the director of national intelligence and the Department of Homeland Security, and Mr. Trump suffered his worst blow to date, with the release of a recording in which he bragged about sexually assaulting women. The Podesta emails were nowhere near as sensational as the Trump video. But, released by WikiLeaks day after day over the last month of the campaign, they provided material for countless news reports. They disclosed the contents of Mrs. Clinton’s speeches to large banks, which she had refused to release. They exposed tensions inside the campaign, including disagreements over donations to the Clinton Foundation that staff members thought might look bad for the candidate and Ms. Tanden’s complaint that Mrs. Clinton’s instincts were “suboptimal. ” “I was just mortified,” Ms. Tanden said in an interview. Her emails were released on the eve of one of the presidential debates, she recalled. “I put my hands over my head and said, ‘I can’t believe this is happening to me. ’” Though she had regularly appeared on television to support Mrs. Clinton, she canceled her appearances because all the questions were about what she had said in the emails. Ms. Tanden, like other Democrats whose messages became public, said it was obvious to her that WikiLeaks was trying its best to damage the Clinton campaign. “If you care about transparency, you put all the emails out at once,” she said. “But they wanted to hurt her. So they put them out 1, 800 to 3, 000 a day. ” The Trump campaign knew in advance about WikiLeaks’ plans. Days before the Podesta email release began, Roger Stone, a Republican operative working with the Trump campaign, sent out an excited tweet about what was coming. But in an interview, Mr. Stone said he had no role in the leaks he had just heard from an American with ties to WikiLeaks that damning emails were coming. Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder and editor, has resisted the conclusion that his site became a   for Russian hackers working for Mr. Putin’s government or that he was deliberately trying to undermine Mrs. Clinton’s candidacy. But the evidence on both counts appears compelling. In a series of email exchanges, Mr. Assange refused to say anything about WikiLeaks’ source for the hacked material. He denied that he had made his animus toward Mrs. Clinton clear in public statements (“False. But what is this? Junior high? ”) or that the site had timed the releases for maximum negative effect on her campaign. “WikiLeaks makes its decisions based on newsworthiness, including for its recent epic scoops,” he wrote. Mr. Assange disputed the conclusion of the Oct. 7 statement from the intelligence agencies that the leaks were “intended to interfere with the U. S. election process. ” “This is false,” he wrote. “As the disclosing party we know that this was not the intent. Publishers publishing newsworthy information during an election is part of a free election. ” But asked whether he believed the leaks were one reason for Mr. Trump’s election, Mr. Assange seemed happy to take credit. “Americans extensively engaged with our publications,” he wrote. “According to Facebook statistics WikiLeaks was the most referenced political topic during October. ” Though Mr. Assange did not say so, WikiLeaks’ best defense may be the conduct of the mainstream American media. Every major publication, including The Times, published multiple stories citing the D. N. C. and Podesta emails posted by WikiLeaks, becoming a de facto instrument of Russian intelligence. Mr. Putin, a student of martial arts, had turned two institutions at the core of American democracy  —   political campaigns and independent media  —   to his own ends. The media’s appetite for the hacked material, and its focus on the gossipy content instead of the Russian source, disturbed some of those whose personal emails were being reposted across the web. “What was really surprising to me?” Ms. Tanden said. “I could not believe that reporters were covering it. ” Inside the White House, as Mr. Obama’s advisers debated their response, their conversation turned to North Korea. In late 2014, hackers working for Kim   the North’s young and unpredictable leader, had carried out a   attack on Sony Pictures Entertainment intended to stop the Christmastime release of a comedy about a C. I. A. plot to kill Mr. Kim. In that case, embarrassing emails had also been released. But the real damage was done to Sony’s own systems: More than 70 percent of its computers melted down when a particularly virulent form of malware was released. Within weeks, intelligence agencies traced the attack back to the North and its leadership. Mr. Obama called North Korea out in public, and issued some    sanctions. The Chinese even cooperated, briefly cutting off the North’s internet connections. As the first Situation Room meetings on the Russian hacking began in July, “it was clear that Russia was going to be a much more complicated case,” said one participant. The Russians clearly had a more sophisticated understanding of American politics, and they were masters of “kompromat,” their term for compromising information. But a formal “attribution report” still had not been forwarded to the president. “It took forever,” one senior administration official said, complaining about the pace at which the intelligence assessments moved through the system. In August a group that called itself the “Shadow Brokers” published a set of software tools that looked like what the N. S. A. uses to break into foreign computer networks and install “implants,” malware that can be used for surveillance or attack. The code came from the Tailored Access Operations unit of the N. S. A. a secretive group that mastered the arts of surveillance and cyberwar. The assumption  —   still unproved  —   was that the code was put out in the open by the Russians as a warning: Retaliate for the D. N. C. and there are a lot more secrets, from the hackings of the State Department, the White House and the Pentagon, that might be spilled as well. One senior official compared it to the scene in “The Godfather” where the head of a favorite horse is left in a bed, as a warning. The N. S. A. said nothing. But by late August, Admiral Rogers, its director, was pressing for a more muscular response to the Russians. In his role as director of the Pentagon’s Cyber Command, he proposed a series of potential  . While officials will not discuss them in detail, the possible counterstrikes reportedly included operations that would turn the tables on Mr. Putin, exposing his financial links to Russia’s oligarchs, and punching holes in the Russian internet to allow dissidents to get their message out. Pentagon officials judged the measures too unsubtle and ordered up their own set of options. But in the end, none of those were formally presented to the president. In a series of “deputies meetings” run by Avril Haines, the deputy national security adviser and a former deputy director of the C. I. A. several officials warned that an overreaction by the administration would play into Mr. Putin’s hands. “If we went to Defcon 4,” one frequent participant in Ms. Haines’s meetings said, using a phrase from the Cold War days of warnings of war, “we would be saying to the public that we didn’t have confidence in the integrity of our voting system. ” Even something seemingly straightforward  —   using the president’s executive powers, bolstered after the Sony incident, to place economic and travel sanctions on cyberattackers  —   seemed too risky. “No one was all that eager to impose costs before Election Day,” said another participant in the classified meeting. “Any retaliatory measures were seen through the prism of what would happen on Election Day. ” Instead, when Mr. Obama’s national security team reconvened after summer vacation, the focus turned to a crash effort to secure the nation’s voting machines and   rolls from hacking. The scenario they discussed most frequently  —   one that turned out not to be an issue  —   was a narrow vote in favor of Mrs. Clinton, followed by a declaration by Mr. Trump that the vote was “rigged” and more leaks intended to undercut her legitimacy. Donna Brazile, the interim chairwoman of the D. N. C. became increasingly frustrated as the clock continued to run down on the presidential election  —   and still there was no broad public condemnation by the White House, or Republican Party leaders, of the attack as an act of foreign espionage. Ms. Brazile even reached out to Reince Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, urging him twice in private conversations and in a letter to join her in condemning the attacks  —   an offer he declined to take up. “We just kept hearing the government would respond, the government would respond,” she said. “Once upon a time, if a foreign government interfered with our election we would respond as a nation, not as a political party. ” But Mr. Obama did decide that he would deliver a warning to Mr. Putin in person at a Group of 20 summit meeting in Hangzhou, China, the last time they would be in the same place while Mr. Obama was still in office. When the two men met for a tense   Mr. Obama explicitly warned Mr. Putin of a strong American response if there was continued effort to influence the election or manipulate the vote, according to White House officials who were not present for the    meeting. Later that day, Mr. Obama made a rare reference to America’s own offensive cybercapacity, which he has almost never talked about. “Frankly, both offensively and defensively, we have more capacity,” he told reporters. But when it came time to make a public assertion of Russia’s role in early October, it was made in a written statement from the director of national intelligence and the secretary of homeland security. It was far less dramatic than the president’s appearance in the press room two years before to directly accuse the North Koreans of attacking Sony. The reference in the statement to hackings on “political organizations,” officials now say, encompassed a hacking on data stored by the Republicans as well. Two senior officials say the forensic evidence was accompanied by “human and technical” sources in Russia, which appears to mean that the United States’ implants or taps in Russian computer and phone networks helped confirm the country’s role. But that may not be known for decades, until the secrets are declassified. A week later Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. was sent out to transmit a public warning to Mr. Putin: The United States will retaliate “at the time of our choosing. And under the circumstances that have the greatest impact. ” Later, after Mr. Biden said he was not concerned that Russia could “fundamentally alter the election,” he was asked whether the American public would know if the message to Mr. Putin had been sent. “Hope not,” Mr. Biden responded. Some of his former colleagues think that was the wrong answer. An American counterstrike, said Michael Morell, the former deputy director of the C. I. A. under Mr. Obama, has “got to be overt. It needs to be seen. ” A covert response would significantly limit the deterrence effect, he added. “If you can’t see it, it’s not going to deter the Chinese and North Koreans and Iranians and others. ” The Obama administration says it still has more than 30 days to do exactly that. As the year draws to a close, it now seems possible that there will be multiple investigations of the Russian hacking  —   the intelligence review Mr. Obama has ordered completed by Jan. 20, the day he leaves office, and one or more congressional inquiries. They will wrestle with, among other things, Mr. Putin’s motive. Did he seek to mar the brand of American democracy, to forestall   activism for both Russians and their neighbors? Or to weaken the next American president, since presumably Mr. Putin had no reason to doubt American forecasts that Mrs. Clinton would win easily? Or was it, as the C. I. A. concluded last month, a deliberate attempt to elect Mr. Trump? In fact, the Russian    scheme accomplished all three goals. What seems clear is that Russian hacking, given its success, is not going to stop. Two weeks ago, the German intelligence chief, Bruno Kahl, warned that Russia might target elections in Germany next year. “The perpetrators have an interest to delegitimize the democratic process as such,” Mr. Kahl said. Now, he added, “Europe is in the focus of these attempts of disturbance, and Germany to a particularly great extent. ” But Russia has by no means forgotten its American target. On the day after the presidential election, the cybersecurity company Volexity reported five new waves of phishing emails, evidently from Cozy Bear, aimed at think tanks and nonprofits in the United States. One of them purported to be from Harvard University, attaching a fake paper. Its title: “Why American Elections Are Flawed. ”



############################################################

1 - With spring in the Texas air, some Baylor University students were navigating the social challenges of another   party, chatting and dancing while trying not to spill their drinks. Amid the swirl, a petite freshman named Jasmin Hernandez lost sight of her friends. Then Tevin Elliott, a    Baylor football player dating someone she knew, appeared. Earlier he had been pouring hard liquor for Ms. Hernandez and other underage students now he was insisting that her friends had gone outside. When Ms. Hernandez expressed doubts, she said, he began pulling her by the wrist toward the door, telling her they had gone outside. But the farther they strayed into the darkness, the more she argued that her friends were back at the party, and that they should return. Without a word, she later said in a lawsuit, the      linebacker picked up the   freshman and made his violent intentions clear. Panicking, Ms. Hernandez told him that she was sorry if she gave him the wrong impression that they should just go back to the house and forget this ever happened that she was, in fact, gay. He acted as though he did not hear. When Mr. Elliott finished raping her behind a secluded shed, an angry Ms. Hernandez used an expletive in demanding her shirt back. “He tossed it over to me,” she later recalled. “And that was the end of the interaction. ” Ms. Hernandez, who has appeared on ESPN and who spoke to The Times for this article, assumed that her rape was a horrible but isolated incident at Baylor, a private university of nearly 17, 000 students that takes pride in its Baptist foundation. And she wasn’t alone in believing that: Even after Mr. Elliott was convicted and sentenced to 20 years in 2014, Baylor officials said they considered him to be a solitary bad actor preying on a campus of goodness. As three leading members of Baylor’s Board of Regents later described their sense of him at the time: “an isolated case. ” Mr. Elliott has subsequently been accused of sexually assaulting several other women, and since the rape of Ms. Hernandez in 2012 the allegations of sexual assault by Baylor football players have multiplied, causing incalculable damage to the university’s reputation and leading to resignations and firings, including those of the president, the football coach and the athletic director. The crisis has left alumni apoplectic, students outraged, donors turning on one another, and the Board of Regents bracing for the next blow. Lawsuits clutter the courts, with more than a dozen women, including Ms. Hernandez, claiming that they had been assaulted amid a campus culture that put them at risk. Two months ago, John Clune, a Colorado lawyer who specializes in cases of campus assault and who had already resolved three other women’s claims against Baylor, filed a lawsuit on behalf of an alleged victim that sought, in part, to quantify the crisis. It made the startling claim that at least 52 rapes by at least 31 players had occurred from 2011 through 2014  —   a period when the   Baylor football program became a dominant force in the highly competitive Big 12 Conference. Baylor’s interim president has said in a statement that he cannot confirm Mr. Clune’s numbers, which followed other troubling figures that Baylor’s board gave to The Wall Street Journal in October: assaults on 17 women by 19 players, including four gang rapes. Collectively, the cases have become a cautionary parable for   college athletics, one in which a Christian university seemed to lose sight of its core values in pursuit of football glory and protected gridiron heroes who preyed on women. In a statement to The New York Times on Monday, Baylor officials said the university was committed to “doing the right thing”  —   through   repeated apologies and making 105 recommended changes to its policies and structure. “Our mission statement calls for a caring community based on Christian principles, and any act of sexual violence is inimical to these standards,” the statement said. Even so, the scandal has not sat well in Texas. Last week, the Texas Rangers, the statewide law enforcement agency, confirmed that it had begun a preliminary investigation into Baylor. That announcement came days after a state representative, Roland Gutierrez of San Antonio, filed a resolution urging Gov. Greg Abbott to have the Rangers investigate “the obstruction of justice surrounding the sexual assault of young female students at Baylor University. ” And this week, a federal judge rejected Baylor’s request to throw out a lawsuit filed against the university by 10 women who say they were sexually assaulted while they were students. Judge Robert L. Pitman of Federal District Court ruled that each plaintiff had “plausibly alleged that Baylor was deliberately indifferent to her report( s) of sexual assault, depriving her of educational opportunities to which she was entitled. ” For most of her freshman year, Ms. Hernandez was passionate about the Baylor green and gold. A native of Southern California, she came to the university’s verdant campus in Waco to study nursing on an academic scholarship. She loved her teachers and friends, and enjoyed cheering on the ascendant football team  —   a sudden powerhouse, thanks in part to the likes of her future attacker, Mr. Elliott. She arrived at a time of athletic excellence so bountiful that the   school year came to be known as the Year of the Bear. The football team had its first Heisman Trophy winner in the quarterback Robert Griffin III the men’s basketball team reached the N. C. A. A. tournament’s round of eight for the second time in three years and the women’s team went   for the national championship. This run of success was all the more extraordinary for what had come before: decades of mediocrity in major sports, with the lows far outnumbering the highs. Then, before the 2008 season, the university hired Art Briles as its football coach. And things changed. Mr. Briles was Texas to the core  —   a quarterback for his father at Rule High School, a wide receiver at the University of Houston and a coach at five Texas high schools before he entered the college ranks. Along the way, he devised an explosive offensive system that seemed to attack the end zone on every snap. He inherited a Baylor program that had not had a winning season since 1995. What’s more, schools like Baylor, then a   choice for top recruits in one of the country’s most   states, rarely experience quick turnarounds. But the new coach pulled it off by his third year, the Bears were winning more than they lost. The university and its alumni responded, reportedly paying the charismatic Mr. Briles one of the highest salaries in college sports and embarking upon a   campaign that led to the $266 million construction of McLane Stadium  —   a breathtaking football cathedral that abuts the Brazos River and Interstate 35. Just before the 2014 season, Mr. Briles marveled at the visual and emotional power of the stadium, saying, “Show me something better. ” Mr. Briles imagined the impression the sight would leave on an    child looking out the window of a passing car. “They’re going to say, ‘Momma or Grandmother, man, look at that place,’” he said. “‘That place is beautiful. Where is that?’ And she’s going to say, ‘Baylor.’ “And then so for the rest of their lives they’re going to associate Baylor with excellence. And that’s hard to come by and the only way to get it is through the production of image. “So our image is good. ” The promise of McLane  —   named after Drayton McLane Jr. Class of ’58, who made his fortune with a   business  —   helped stimulate capital campaigns that focused on a new scholarship fund and a new campus for the business school. “Success in athletics means that all boats rise,” Kenneth W. Starr, then the university’s president, told The Times in 2014. Mr. Starr had arrived at Baylor in 2010 with a formidable résumé and a clear vision. A former solicitor general, federal judge, law school dean and independent counsel  —   the Javert in the President Bill Clinton sex scandal  —   he promised an administrative stability that the university had lacked in recent years. He raised Baylor’s academic profile and presided over ambitious   efforts, all while endearing himself to undergraduates. He was the avuncular “Judge Starr,” leading freshmen on a pregame sprint across the field to invigorate the crowd at each home game. The dynamic pairing of Mr. Starr and Mr. Briles signaled to students and alumni alike that, with the twinning of their respective strengths, Baylor was going places. Along the way, the university’s football players appeared on giant posters, on computer screen savers  —   just about anywhere you looked on campus. A    bronze statue of Mr. Griffin, midthrow, greeted visitors to McLane Stadium when it opened in 2014. The message was clear: Our heroes. But myriad court cases suggest that as the boats of Baylor rose, to use Mr. Starr’s analogy, standards fell overboard. Baylor and its football program, it seemed, began to value   talent above all else. Baylor’s football team signed up transfers with disciplinary issues in their pasts. There was Shawn Oakman, for example, a huge defensive end dismissed from Penn State’s team for stealing a sandwich and grabbing a female store clerk by the wrist. And Sam Ukwuachu, a former Freshman   defensive end kicked off Boise State’s team for reasons that were left publicly unclear at the time his   later testified that he had assaulted her. (Mr. Briles has said that he was unaware of the assault accusation.) According to the lawsuit filed by Mr. Clune, the lawyer from Colorado, the football staff at the Baptist institution employed a “‘Show em a good time’ policy,” in which current players offered alcohol and drugs to high school prospects visiting the campus and introduced them to female students. The lawsuit also alleged that the university unofficially used its hostess program, the Baylor Bruins, to further entice recruits. It said that “attractive female students” in the Bruins were expected to ensure that recruits had a good time on campus by, for example, engaging “in sexual acts with the recruits to help secure the recruits’ commitment to Baylor. ” The university’s interim president, David E. Garland, has called these allegations “disappointing and horrifying,” and has said that “none of the activities described in the filing align with our past or current institutional recruiting practices. ” A particularly notorious allegation in the lawsuit is that Kendal Briles, a former assistant coach and Art Briles’s son, enticed one recruit by saying: “Do you like white women? Because we have a lot of them at Baylor and they LOVE football players. ” The younger Mr. Briles declined to comment through a spokeswoman for his current employer, Florida Atlantic University. As for the assault accusations, Baylor’s Board of Regents later concluded that the football program’s coaches and staff “reinforced an overall perception that football was above the rules, and that there was no culture of accountability for misconduct. ” Baylor, they wrote, “failed to take sufficient action to identify, eliminate, prevent and address a potential hostile environment in individual cases. ” As Jasmin Hernandez would learn. Visiting the Baylor campus in the spring of 2011, Ms. Hernandez found the thrill of a rising university to be contagious. Everyone “seemed really excited to be there,” she recalled, the sense being “If you go here, there are good things ahead. ” Nothing embodied that excitement as much as the football team. Ms. Hernandez attended several games her freshman year, and participated in some   rituals, such as wearing a football jersey with the number of her graduation year and cheering on the players and coaches as they took the field. “Really cool,” she recalled. But after Ms. Hernandez was raped, she would allege in a lawsuit filed last year, she encountered an indifference on campus  —   even a callousness  —   that baffled and wounded her. Her friends at the party immediately took her to a nearby hospital, where she recounted the assault for a Waco police officer. Her worried mother arrived from California and, almost immediately, asked the university’s counseling center to provide her daughter with mental health services. But, the lawsuit claimed, the counseling center was too busy to see her daughter  —   and so was the student health center. “I went in, told them I’d been sexually assaulted by another student, and asked if there was someone I could talk to, like a medical doctor,” Ms. Hernandez said. “They told me all their appointments through the end of the semester were taken. I went back several times. Every time they denied me  —   told me there was nothing they could do. ” The academic services department also said there was nothing it could do, the lawsuit claimed. No accommodations could be granted, the Hernandezes were told. According to the lawsuit, Ms. Hernandez’s mother reached out to Mr. Briles and was told by his secretary that his office had heard of the alleged rape by one of his budding stars and was looking into it. But Mr. Briles did not return several   calls from Ms. Hernandez’s father, the lawsuit claimed, adding that the university “did not take any action whatsoever to investigate. ” Baylor has disputed Ms. Hernandez’s narrative in a court filing, but it did not respond to questions seeking elaboration. University officials have said in another court filing that Ms. Hernandez was Mr. Elliott’s fifth alleged assault victim at Baylor  —   her lawsuit said she was the sixth who had reported a sexual assault to Baylor  —   and that Mr. Briles was indeed apprised of her alleged assault. In addition, they said, only extraordinary interventions by Mr. Starr and Mr. Briles kept Mr. Elliott from suspension or worse because of academic misconduct. Mr. Briles, in a written statement released last week, said that he “did not cover up any sexual violence” and “had no contact with anyone that claimed to be a victim of sexual or domestic assault,” and that whenever alerted of an alleged assault, he would send the clear message that “the alleged victim should go to the police. ” All the while, Ms. Hernandez was determined to follow through with her Baylor career. But she could not. “I was extremely emotionally unstable,” she said. “It’s not that I couldn’t live my daily life, because I could, but it was very interrupted by turbulent emotions that I couldn’t exactly predict and that I didn’t know how to deal with. ” After posting poor grades during the   school year  —   a decline that she attributed to her trauma  —   Ms. Hernandez was informed by Baylor that she had lost her academic scholarship. She dropped out of the school she once loved, returned to California and began therapy. That fall, the Baylor Bears were   and won the Big 12. In early 2014, Mr. Elliott was convicted of sexually assaulting her and sentenced to 20 years in prison. That fall, the Bears were again   and shared the Big 12 championship with Texas Christian. Baylor was moving on. The first clear signal that the Elliott case was more than a Baylor aberration came in the late summer of 2015  —   two years after a damaged Ms. Hernandez quietly dropped out  —   when Texas Monthly published a disturbing account of the alleged rape of another Baylor woman by another football player: the troubled transfer from Boise State, Sam Ukwuachu. This episode was said to have occurred nearly two years earlier, in October 2013, while Mr. Ukwuachu was sitting out the football season as a   transfer student. According to Texas Monthly, Baylor officials had conducted only a cursory investigation in deciding not to pursue the sexual assault claim against Mr. Ukwuachu, who was eventually convicted and sentenced to 180 days in jail and 10 years’ probation. Testimony in the case against the      Mr. Ukwuachu was devastating. “He was using all of his strength to pull up my dress and do stuff to me,” said the victim. Baylor’s president, Mr. Starr, promptly issued a letter addressed to “Baylor Nation. ” It began: “By God’s grace, we are living in a golden era at Baylor University. However, today we are filled with profound sadness. ” He expressed grief for the victim, asserted that those who engage in sexual violence would “find no shelter” on campus, and announced that a faculty member with prosecutorial experience would investigate the circumstances of the Ukwuachu case. That professor’s weeklong inquiry convinced Mr. Starr of the need for a more comprehensive investigation. The Board of Regents soon hired Pepper Hamilton, a Philadelphia law firm with experience in investigating potential violations of Title IX, the federal law mandating gender equity in higher education. Pepper Hamilton’s inquiry lasted several months. The complete results of its investigation, which included interviews with central figures and access to a million pieces of information, have never been made public  —   because, the university said, they were delivered orally to the Board of Regents. Releasing all of them in written form, several regents later said, would have taken an additional six months. University officials have said they limited public information in deference to federal privacy law, confidentiality agreements and victims’ presumed feelings. But critics say that asking only for an oral report is a standard tactic for avoiding full accountability. The board’s public summary of that Pepper Hamilton briefing, in May 2016, was still damning. In a   report, the board excoriated its own institution  —   and itself  —   for failing to adhere to a federal requirement that victims of campus sexual assault receive a “prompt and equitable response” from their college. In one instance, it reported, a student was retaliated against for reporting an assault other students, it added, may have feared being stigmatized for reporting assaults that involved underage drinking or premarital sex. Investigations, they wrote, “were conducted in the context of a broader culture and belief by many administrators that sexual violence ‘doesn’t happen here. ’” Most of the report addressed the entire university  —   though a few pages near the end focused squarely on the football program. Football officials, it charged, had set up a parallel justice system for their players, did not properly report complaints to the rest of the university and in some cases tried to keep law enforcement authorities out. Mr. Briles, the revered coach who had led Baylor to gridiron glory, was effectively fired. Mr. Starr, the affable president who reveled in that glory, was demoted he later resigned. Ian McCaw, the athletic director, was placed on probation with sanctions by the university for mishandling sexual assault allegations he, too, later resigned, and now holds the same position at Liberty University. The board also vowed institutional changes. And it apologized to Baylor Nation. “We were horrified by the extent of these acts of sexual violence on our campus,” Richard S. Willis, then chairman of the Board of Regents, said. “This investigation revealed the university’s mishandling of reports in what should have been a supportive, responsive and caring environment for students. ” The board’s confessional housecleaning may have been intended, at least in part, to begin putting this episode in the past. Instead, the scandal has continued to define  —   or redefine  —   Baylor. Other women have followed the lead of Ms. Hernandez, filing lawsuits claiming sexual assault by Baylor students, athletes and  . One recounts the alleged gang rape of a young Bruins hostess by two football players, one of whom supposedly tried to “stare down” a worried young man who had dared to interrupt the moment. Implicated football players have left or been expelled. Mr. Oakman, the     defensive end who had transferred to Baylor from Penn State, became at least the third former player to be indicted on sexual assault charges. His criminal case, in which he has pleaded not guilty, is pending. Some changes have come. Outsiders have taken over as football coach and athletic director, and a search committee is engaged in finding a permanent president. A few of the 105 recommendations concern the board itself, a structurally insular institution whose voting members are primarily determined by current membership. In addition, the Big 12 took the rare, if largely symbolic, step of withholding a quarter of Baylor’s payouts  —   about $6 million this year, according to The Associated Press, and more in years to come  —   until promised changes are actually made and, as the Big 12 board chairman said in a statement, “systems are in place to avoid future problems. ” In its statement to The Times, Baylor said: “There should be no doubt that, rather than worrying about its ‘brand,’ Baylor leadership has been focused on doing the right thing. ” The university went on to say that its efforts to address and repair the damage done far surpass those taken by any other educational institution. “No other college or university has, at its own initiative, undergone such a thorough ” it said. “No other college or university has made such wholesale leadership changes based on that  . No other college or university has eagerly embraced an ambitious slate of 105 recommended changes. And, despite the accusations of some, no other university has been as transparent about its failings. ” But some critics say that the university should not be so quick to flatter itself  —   pointing out that, among other things, it was slow to make a clean break from the Briles era. Although it hired an acting football coach last year, it retained nearly all of Mr. Briles’s staff, including his son and   . These Briles loyalists made known their continued allegiance to those accused of presiding over a football culture in which sexual violence seemed to thrive. The university has also been criticized for not being fully forthcoming about the scandal. A group of alumni and donors, Bears for Leadership Reform, has demanded full transparency, beginning with the release of all material related to the Pepper Hamilton briefing. Its members include Mr. McLane, after whom the football stadium is named. Last month, the reform group called on the university to reveal how much it was paying in legal fees to have recommendations from the Pepper Hamilton report carried out. The group estimated that the scandal had cost Baylor $223 million in expenses such as legal fees and settlements as well as in lost revenue from projected contributions. The developments are so numerous and the media attention so intense that Baylor’s website has a page called, simply, “The Facts”  —   as in “The Facts About the Sexual Assault Crisis at Baylor. ” Here you can find links to “Latest Updates,” “University Improvements” and “Setting the Record Straight. ” The “Facts” page reflects how Baylor’s embattled Board of Regents, after months of silence, has adopted a new public relations strategy that is less opaque and more aggressive in a bid, officials acknowledged, to make the public narrative accurate. For example, in responding to a lawsuit filed by a dismissed football staff member, university officials recently released text messages that seem to demonstrate how Mr. Briles sought to cover up various misdeeds by some of his players. Those text messages presumably came from the trove of information accumulated by the Pepper Hamilton investigation  —   the very information that reformers and others are demanding be made public without prejudice. Mr. Briles sued for defamation  —   he dropped the suit just before the text messages were released  —   accusing Baylor of making a “scapegoat” of him, perhaps to make a case that the problem had been solved, like a limb amputated before gangrene has spread. University officials replied in a court filing that Mr. Briles was “not a ‘scapegoat’” but “part of the larger problem. ” Several donors asked last June that Mr. Briles, 61, be reinstated or at most suspended unless the Regents could offer more evidence of his complicity, which the regents declined to do at the time, university officials said in a court filing. After Mr. Briles’s text messages were released, Bears for Leadership Reform said it was “appalled. ” Then there are the likes of John Eddie Williams Jr.: a member of the Class of 1976, a former nose guard for the Baylor football team, a successful Houston lawyer and a benefactor so generous that the field at McLane Stadium was named after him. He is also a member of Bears for Leadership Reform, and he is furious at what he said was the university’s mismanagement of this crisis  —   including its lack of transparency. “When you have horrible events like occurred at Baylor, you need to have transparency, and that’s the only way we’ll move forward,” Mr. Williams said. “Let the word come out. Let it come out, the good, the bad, the ugly. Put it all on the table. “That’s how we learn from our mistakes and move forward. ” The steady stream of revelations would seem only to have helped the case of Jasmin Hernandez, who, in pressing charges against her rapist, struck the first powerful blow against Baylor’s disturbing culture. This week, her lawyer secured court permission to incorporate new information into her lawsuit  —   including the allegation of 52 sexual assaults by at least 31 players over four years. (A prime defense cited by the defendants in her case  —   Mr. Briles, Mr. McCaw and Baylor  —   is that her claims are   by a   statute of limitations.) She is now a junior at California State University, Fullerton. And, yes, she remembers some of the good experiences she had at Baylor: the supportive friends, the passionate teachers, the many engaging activities. But Ms. Hernandez said that the Baptist university in Waco simply was not ethical when dealing with allegations of sexual assaults by its revered football players  —   or, for that matter, when dealing with the traumatized victims of those sexual assaults. As new revelations have come out, she said, she has been “shocked”  —   yet, at the same time, “not surprised. ” She does not closely follow the many news accounts of the continuing scandal, especially those that concern her case. “I don’t care to see myself through that light,” said Ms. Hernandez, once a scholarship member of Baylor University’s Class of 2015.

1 - Six days after he was sworn in as America’s 45th president, Donald J. Trump traveled to Philadelphia to address Republican lawmakers at their annual retreat. Standing behind a lectern emblazoned with the presidential seal, Trump predicted, “This Congress is going to be the busiest Congress we’ve had in decades. ” Being Trump, he could not resist   a superlative: “Maybe ever. Maybe ever. Think of that. ” The legislators responded with a curious silence  —   perhaps awed by the thought, perhaps also a bit unnerved. After years mired in   the   Congress had both the means and, Trump believed, the mandate to roll back Barack Obama’s liberal legacy. At the top of their hit list was Obama’s monumental health care legislation, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. During the six and a half years since its passage, Republicans maintained a striking unanimity in their hatred of what they derisively called Obamacare. And over that same period, they became thoroughly united in the conviction that Trump expressed from the outset of his candidacy  —   namely, that he “would repeal and replace” the health care law “with something far better. ” But in the months since Trump’s victory, many of the lawmakers in attendance that day had become increasingly worried about how they would go about undoing the legislation. That same weekend in Philadelphia, Republican members of Congress were caught on tape fretting aloud about what the “something far better” to replace the law should be. Should they allow states to accept expanded Medicaid benefits, as Obamacare had done? Should they enter what Representative John Faso, a New York Republican, called the “political minefield” of defunding Planned Parenthood as part of the package? For that matter, should they really be rushing to repeal the A. C. A. before they had any idea of what would replace it? Looming over the gathering was a question that it was perhaps now too late to ask: Had Republicans become trapped by their pledge to do away with Obamacare? A few days before the retreat, I met up with the man who, perhaps more than any other figure in the conservative movement, had maneuvered the party toward complete and unbending opposition to Obamacare: Michael Needham of the Heritage Foundation. Needham, 35, is the chief executive of Heritage Action for America, a feral cur of a lobbying organization established by the venerable conservative think tank in 2010 to (as its website puts it) “hold Congress accountable to conservative principles. ” Though other organizations  —   among them the Club for Growth and Americans for Tax Reform  —   have vigorously opposed Obamacare from its inception, Heritage Action has spent the last six years almost monomaniacally focused on demanding that legislators abolish the hated law. It scores them on what it deems critical votes and loudly condemns any and all apostasies. It names names and, when necessary to its ends, is happy to defy the Republican leadership. In violating Reagan’s “11th Commandment” not to speak ill of others in his party, Needham has come to rival Ted Cruz as one of the least popular Republicans in Washington. Needham would not seem an obvious choice for this distinction.   and passively handsome in the manner of Mitt Romney, he grew up on Manhattan’s Upper East Side. His youthful acquaintance with struggle was limited to being a Mets fan. After graduating from Williams College in 2004, Needham went straight to work for Heritage, where he was made its director of Asian studies, despite having never visited Asia. In 2007 he briefly left the think tank to become a policy aide for the presidential campaign of Rudolph W. Giuliani, the most liberal of the dozen or so Republican candidates in that cycle. By the time Obamacare was signed into law in March 2010, Needham had again temporarily left Heritage, attending Stanford Business School and dating a Democrat whom he would later marry. There was little in the cards to prefigure his imminent future as the    —   and at times deeply reviled  —   lead driver in the Obamacare demolition derby. Like virtually every Republican in Washington, Needham was not especially enamored of Trump during the primaries. “Donald Trump’s a clown,” he said on “Fox News Sunday” just a month after Trump announced his candidacy  —   adding, with evident distaste, “This is a guy who believes in socialized medicine. ” Needham’s preferences ran more to Bobby Jindal, and of course to Cruz, whom Needham reflexively referred to by his first name. Still, Needham and his adopted cause had emerged as unambiguous winners of the 2016 election. On the first day of his presidency, Trump signed an executive order to “seek the prompt repeal” of Obamacare. Thus had Trump and Needham  —   two men who had never met  —   become allies. “I think one of the big disagreements we’ve had with the party for a long time is that we think when you’re trying to win an argument, it can only happen when you start them,” the young C. E. O. said as he sat in his Capitol Hill office, looking somewhat fatigued from having spent the previous weekend   his child. “And this kind of maniacal focus on ‘governing’’u2009”  —   his voice taking on a mocking tone  —   “when all governing means is a   to get good press, instead of laying out a vision of where you want to take the country, was one of the big divides we had. ” But the long, and at times quixotic, struggle to repeal Obamacare in which Needham has been a lead combatant has more closely resembled a street fight than anything that could reasonably be termed an “argument. ” And though it may appear otherwise in a dawning age of Republican   on government, the argument is today far from over. According to a January Fox News poll, Obama’s signature program now enjoys a 50 percent approval rating. There is no guarantee that Republicans in the Senate will sign onto legislation that risks leaving millions of their constituents suddenly without health care coverage while alienating key donors  —   drug makers, insurance companies and doctor associations  —   who helped shape and support the law Trump now seeks to replace. “The joke around Washington,” the former Democratic congressman Jim McDermott told me, “is that the Republicans are going to repeal Obamacare  —   and they’ll replace it with the Affordable Care Act. ” The building that houses the Heritage Foundation, on Massachusetts Avenue near the Capitol, stands as an   monument to   perversity. It was here, in 1989, that the intellectual framework was first developed for what would become the Affordable Care Act. And it is here where Needham has spent the last six years trying to exterminate what he sees as the Frankenstein’s Monster that Heritage inadvertently set loose upon the land. The basic architecture of the bill that would eventually become the A. C. A. was conceived in 1989 by the Heritage Foundation policy analyst Stuart Butler as a conservative alternative to   health care. It was first put into practice in 2006 by Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts, who devised his state’s health care policy with the help of two other Heritage health care specialists, Bob Moffit and Ed Haislmaier. But for many decades, conservatives had resisted increasing the federal government’s role in health care. That remained true in 2009, when the newly elected President Barack Obama undertook to pass legislation that would extend health care coverage to tens of millions of Americans. What Obama and the   Congress ultimately settled on was a framework of health care exchanges  —   marketplaces where health insurance could be purchased, and had to be, if you weren’t already covered. This was the   “individual mandate” first advocated (albeit in the context of a   health care system) by Butler and later embraced by Romney. Obama opposed the concept as a candidate, in favor of an unspecified plan that he claimed would lower costs. What many Democrats on the Hill  —   “probably more than half of our caucus,” McDermott says  —   preferred was a   system, in which health care costs are borne not by insurers but instead by a single fund, typically originating from taxpayers, as Medicare does. But half of the Democratic caucus wasn’t enough for a bill to pass the House, much less the Senate. When a congressional majority failed to materialize for a hybrid measure, known as the “public option,” in which consumers would be allowed to choose among   insurance plans as well as private ones, Democrats were left with the individual mandate. The final   legislative package would aim to “increase the quality, availability and affordability of private and public health insurance to over 44 million uninsured Americans,” as the administration put it. Applicants whose income was between 100 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty line would be eligible for federally subsidized insurance. Those with incomes at or below 138 percent would now qualify for Medicaid in states that chose to participate in the program. Young people up to the age of 26 were permitted to stay on their parents’ health insurance. Americans with   medical conditions could not be denied coverage. And a variety of other regulations, taxes, penalties and incentives would be set up to maximize participation on the part of insurers, recipients, physicians and health care centers. Though the details of the Affordable Care Act, as the final bill came to be called, left plenty of room for disagreement, its fundamental reliance on   health care overseen by the federal government was a concept anathema to most Republicans. In a   memo written by the Republican pollster Frank Luntz in spring 2009, Republicans were urged to use the phrase “government takeover” when referring to the Democrats’ health care package. Less heeded was another admonition in Luntz’s memo: “It’s not enough to just say what you’re against. You have to tell them what you’re for. ” In the end, Republicans lacked the numbers necessary to block the bill. On March 21, 2010, the House finally passed on a   vote a version of the bill that was sure to be agreed to by the   Senate. “We didn’t give in to mistrust or to cynicism or to fear,” Obama, announcing the bill’s passage that night in the East Room of the White House, said. “Instead, we proved that we are still a people capable of doing big things and tackling our biggest challenges. ” The day after Obama signed the bill into law, a   Republican backbencher from Iowa named Steve King drafted his own bill in the House to repeal it in its entirety. Since there was no hope of Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s considering King’s bill, he had decided to try a rarely successful legislative tactic known as a discharge petition  —   which, if it gathered signatures from 218 of the 435 House members, would force Pelosi to bring King’s bill to the floor for an    vote. A couple of days after King made his move, in   2010, the two newly minted leaders of Heritage Action  —   Needham, then 28, and the   old chief operating officer, Tim Chapman  —   met in the Capitol with Barry Jackson, chief of staff to John Boehner, the House minority leader at the time. Though Jackson today says that he has no recollection of their visit, Needham and Chapman both say they remember it clearly. After explaining the general mission of their new organization, the young conservatives brought up the recently passed Affordable Care Act. Heritage Action, they informed Jackson, intended to push House members to sign King’s petition. Jackson’s response surprised Chapman and Needham. “He was very clear,” Chapman recalls, “that if we pushed forward on it, we would probably not get all the Republicans on it, and it would be politically detrimental to a lot of Republicans to be on it. He said, ‘I’ve seen all the ads the unions have prepared to run on this stuff.’ I don’t know where he’d seen them. We let off on the gas. We said, ‘We’ll agree to disagree on this one.’ It was the ‘aha’ moment for us: We just don’t see the world the same way. ” As both Chapman and Needham today concede, Jackson might also have had his own “aha” moment, recognizing them as impudent young jerks. Still, their aggression had the full blessing of Ed Feulner, then Heritage’s president, who says fondly of Needham, “He reminded me of myself 40 years earlier. ” As for Heritage Action, he said: “We knew we’d be breaking some china. ” Among Republican elected officials, the Heritage Foundation had long been regarded as a tweedy grandfather, revered but not feared. The think tank was proficient at spewing out white papers and keynote speeches. But because of its status as a 501( c)(3) nonprofit, it could not devote a substantial part of its activities to taking positions on congressional votes or campaigning against political foes. Heritage sat by helplessly in 2003 while President George W. Bush, dismaying conservative purists, promoted and then signed into law a new federal entitlement that used Medicare to extend prescription benefits to senior citizens. Two years later, Heritage could do nothing to rescue Bush’s Social Security privatization measure from defeat. Now, with Heritage Action as a 501( c)(4) “social welfare organization,” the foundation at last had its own squad in the fight. And in Needham, Feulner had a   lieutenant whose job, as Feulner put it, would be “to run the flag up the flagpole and see who salutes. ” Steve King’s bill was Heritage Action’s first flag. It had not occurred to Needham and Chapman to see things Barry Jackson’s way  —   to consider that Republicans’ taking an unambiguous stand to completely repeal Obamacare could cost them House seats five months later. Jackson’s hesitancy to campaign on full repeal was in fact shared by many Republican leaders. One of them, Senator John Cornyn, the chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, said of Obamacare in May: “There is noncontroversial stuff here, like the   conditions exclusion and those sorts of things. Now, we are not interested in repealing that. And that is frankly a distraction. ” To Needham, there was only one way to look at the matter. “What’s the point in having a conservative party if we’re not going to fight a massive federal intervention in health care?” he told me. “It’s   of our economy!” Needham and Chapman knew there were risks in allying themselves with King, an inveterate   with a deep yearning for the spotlight. But King was also a tenacious conservative. On June 16, he introduced his discharge petition, and Heritage Action began sending out emails to the foundation’s 661, 000 members, urging them to pressure representatives on both sides of the aisle to sign it  —   ominously adding in a news release that “those who fail to support this effort are responsible for Obamacare. ” The petition soon picked up two highly influential signatories: Representative Tom Price of Georgia, an orthopedic surgeon who was chairman of the Republican Study Committee, the House’s internal conservative think tank and Representative Mike Pence of Indiana, a staunch conservative and personal hero of Needham’s who refused to vote for Bush’s Medicare bill in 2003. A month later, Heritage Action turned up the heat on the 34 Democrats  —   most of them   conservative Blue Dogs  —   who voted against Obamacare in March but had yet to sign King’s discharge petition. In a press statement, Needham declared, “I know their constituents, who will be attending town halls this August, are eager to hear why they do not support the repeal effort. ” In September, a single Democrat, Gene Taylor of Mississippi, added his signature. The tally reached 173, well short of what it would take for King’s bill to make it to the House floor  —   much less to get it passed and then sent over to the Senate, where Republicans’ appetite for abolishing Obamacare altogether was less acute than it was in the House. But though the discharge petition had stalled, King and Heritage Action could justifiably declare a victory of principle and, eventually, an    . Overall, those who pledged fealty to repealing Obamacare fared better that November than those who didn’t. As King told me recently: “The Barry Jacksons and the John Cornyns were clearly wrong. Look at what happened to the Blue Dogs in 2010. There were 53 of them when Obamacare passed. Now I don’t know if you can count three of them. ” King was exaggerating, but not by much  —   there are 18 members of Congress’s Blue Dog Coalition today. “Pelosi made them walk the plank, and they fell like tenpins after that. Since then, I don’t think there’s been a freshman Republican who didn’t run on the full repeal of Obamacare. ” Bashing Obamacare instantly became a winning Republican message  —   an indictment of its polarizing namesake, of   Democrats and of the boogeyman of creeping socialism all rolled into one. During the 2010 midterm election cycle, opponents of the A. C. A. spent $108 million on ads pillorying it. As a reward to the 87 Republican freshmen whose victories had enabled the party to retake the House, Eric Cantor devoted part of his first day as the House majority leader to introducing H. R. 2, the “Repealing the   Health Care Law Act. ” It would become the first of more than 50 bills that would pass the House over the ensuing four years designed to repeal, defund, restrict or delay implementation of Obamacare. None of them stood any chance of becoming a law  —   they were dead on arrival in the   Senate. But to Heritage Action, they served a purpose: in the organization’s parlance, to “lock in” members, to “orient” the Republican Party to conservative principles so that it would “do the right thing. ” At times, however, what looked like the “right thing” was, from Needham’s vantage, in fact the wrong thing. In April 2011, for example, a bill dismantling part of Obamacare did clear the House and then the Senate, and was signed into law by President Obama without hesitation. It was a measure to eliminate the requirement that small companies submit 1099 forms for all transactions exceeding $600, which essentially served as a tax to help pay for the program and which Heritage Action had condemned as “burdensome” and “onerous,” guaranteed to generate paperwork and high accounting fees. But Heritage Action, because of its ironclad resistance to “partial repeal,” actually opposed the measure to get rid of the 1099 provision. Yes, it would help small businesses  —   but then those same small businesses would no longer care to be part of Heritage Action’s crusade. As Needham later told me, “We felt that when anything less than full repeal becomes acceptable, you open the door for every lobbyist in town to say: ‘Hey, while we’re working on full repeal, let’s fix the 1099 issue. Or let’s fix the   issue’’u2009”  —   the popular shorthand for an A. C. A. provision requiring companies with 50 or more employees to provide health care to anyone working over 30 hours a week. “You eventually over time whittle off various constituencies that we want to keep as part of the   platform. ” Partial repeal would be well and good if it got rid of what Needham called a “vital organ” of the law: the individual mandate, say, or Medicaid expansion. But “those vital organs were never going to go down if repeal was defined by Washington’s lobbying class. It would be 1099s and these heavily lobbied issues, and then we’ll be stuck with Obamacare. ” In   Heritage Action declared that it would “key vote,” or place greater emphasis on, bills it deemed especially relevant as litmus tests of members’ conservative bona fides. Needham also began issuing scorecards on how frequently members of Congress were voting down spending bills. The notion of a   former Giuliani aide grading veteran lawmakers on their principles did not go over well. Representative Rob Wittman of Virginia was taken to task in a Heritage Action analysis for casting only four of a potential 11 votes to cut spending during a series of roll calls he had to inform Chapman that he had missed those votes because his father had died. (Chapman did not change Wittman’s score but did explain the reason for Wittman’s absence on the Heritage Action website.) Representative Geoff Davis of Kentucky, a onetime target of Heritage Action’s grading system, fumed to me about the organization’s absolutist browbeating, which came as Republican members were doing their best to thwart Obama’s agenda. “If I’m trying to stop someone’s bleeding on the side of the road, I don’t need to also give them a lecture about how they need to do aerobics and lift weights three times a week,” he said. Echoing the opinion of many Republicans in Washington, Davis asserted that Needham’s operation was less about legislative results than its own  : “Very quickly, it became a conservative   operation,” he said. More than once, Chapman recalls, Republican leaders on the Hill called Feulner to say, “You’ve got to rein these guys in. ” But Heritage Action had other defenders besides Feulner. The new Republican Study Committee chairman, Jim Jordan of Ohio, felt that Needham’s organization was instrumental in pushing the party rightward. Mick Mulvaney of South Carolina, a rising star in the Tea Party class of 2010, characterized Heritage Action’s messaging as “invaluable. ” Even the complaints were tacit acknowledgments of the organization’s growing clout. As a 501( c)(4) Heritage Action was not obliged to disclose its finances, but it was known to have received millions, including $500, 000 from the Koch brothers.     House members pointed with pride to their high Heritage Action scores. Leadership aides saw no choice but to include Needham and Chapman in strategy meetings. And Heritage Action’s relentless focus on its message  —   Obamacare is a disaster that must be repealed in full  —   was already taking its toll. Before the law had even gone fully into effect, polls consistently showed that most Americans disapproved of it. The A. C. A. ’s unpopularity persisted despite a number of modifications meant to improve the program and thus quell discontent. As Kathleen Sebelius, the Health and Human Services secretary at the time, told me: “The notion from Day 1 was to make this work and listen carefully to the feedback, and to help dampen anxiety without gutting key provisions in the law. What made things difficult was that most of the law wasn’t going to be implemented right away. There was this huge gap in time between designing the bill and actually having the benefits fully in place, which gave a lot of opportunity for the opposition to say, ‘This will kill jobs, pestilence will come, vermin will fall from the sky’  —   and very little opportunity for us to say anything other than, ‘Wait and see. ’’u2009” On this point, if nothing else, Sebelius and Needham could agree: The war on Obamacare would become far more difficult for opponents to wage once the actual benefits became available. New enrollees would begin receiving health care coverage on Jan. 1, 2014. It was a glum axiom among conservatives that once Americans were handed a new entitlement  —   Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, food stamps, unemployment insurance  —   they were loath to part with it. Moreover, once a gigantic program fully insinuates itself into the federal governing apparatus, disentangling it is a formidable task. “One of my political heroes in town is Don Rumsfeld,” Feulner told me. “And one of Rumsfeld’s rules is that you want to act as quickly and aggressively as you can, because every day someone in the bureaucracy is narrowing the options you’ll have two days later. That’s clearly what’s happening with Obamacare. Every day the options for full repeal get fewer and fewer. ” On Sept. 24, 2013, House Republicans, goaded by Heritage Action and Ted Cruz, drafted legislation in which they agreed to raise the debt ceiling if Obama agreed to a number of conditions, including delaying implementation of his health care law by one year. Senate Democrats objected, but House Republicans wouldn’t budge. As a consequence, the United States Treasury warned it would soon default on its obligations, and on Oct. 1 the government began shutting down. A couple of days later, Tim Chapman met with several senior Republican staff members and members of conservative activist groups in a House conference room. The shutdown was the crisis point Heritage Action had hoped for  —   that cherished moment when Republicans finally took a bold, principled stand. The public would express outrage that the president was willing to hold America’s full faith and credit hostage over the   Obamacare. Democrats would go wobbly. Republicans in both the House and the Senate would stand firm. In the end, Obama would cave. Or so Needham and Chapman hoped. “Kudos to leadership for doing the right thing,” Chapman told the group. “Now let’s prosecute this case!” His enthusiasm was met with a wall of silence. The others in the room stared at him with a welling resentment. Finally, a   analyst at Americans for Tax Reform said to Chapman: “You’ve been saying the Republicans need to be brave. Well, we’re doing that. We’ve shut the government down. But what does Heritage Action intend to do to put pressure on the Democrats? So far, the only money you’ve spent over the past few months has been a   dollars attacking Republicans. ” Chapman went visibly  . Only a couple of days into the shutdown, it was now occurring to the chief operating officer of Heritage Action that he and Needham had been abandoned by conservative leaders. Within days, the Republicans in the Senate buckled and, with the House Republican leaders in tow, signed a   deal with Obama that said almost nothing about health care. Congress was blamed by the public for causing the shutdown, and its approval ratings plummeted. Throughout the shutdown, Needham insisted that the public would eventually reward Republicans for standing up to Obamacare. “Look,” he told me at the time, “there’s more Americans who are aware right now of the fact that we have one political party that owns Obamacare and was willing to go to the great lengths of shutting down the World War II Memorial in order to preserve it, and another party that tried to stop it. And Americans deserve that type of clarity. ” This opinion was apparently not shared by Speaker Boehner. In December 2013, he told reporters that groups like Heritage Action had “lost all credibility. ” A month later, on the “Tonight” show, he called the government shutdown a “predictable disaster. ” But the continuing intransigence of the repeal advocates was beginning to wear down the White House. Initially, Sebelius says, “we were more focused on the Republican attorneys general across the country who challenged the constitutionality of the law. Until that was resolved by the Supreme Court in June 2012, that was our focus. The congressional action was viewed more as sour grapes and not altogether realistic. Clearly the president wasn’t going to sign anything that would strike down his   law. ” By the time of the shutdown, though, the repealers appeared to have succeeded in getting inside the Obama administration’s collective head. As Oct. 1, 2013  —   the date HealthCare. gov was to be open for enrollments  —   approached, little time was available to subject the website to tests that could expose its shortcomings. But “the one thing that wasn’t feasible, knowing how vehemently the Republicans were determined to stop it at any cost, was moving the deadline,” she said. “That would have mobilized the opposition to the point that we might never have been able to launch it at all. ” And so the White House rolled out a deeply flawed website. By this time, the Republican critique of Obamacare was already becoming a   prophecy. The A. C. A. had been passed with only about   of the funding that it would need to be fully operational, with the expectation that the rest would be portioned out by Congress annually, through the appropriations process that funds discretionary government programs. From 2011 through 2014, as the House Republicans played round after round of fiscal brinkmanship, Obama reluctantly signed   budget deals that continually shortchanged Obamacare. “They did a very effective job making sure there would never be enough to fund implementation,” Sebelius told me. “And they came after the budget over and over. Anything that looked like it could be used, they made sure was gone. ” That was especially the case, Sebelius said, when it came to educating the public about the program’s benefits  —   funding that would have made a difference in the 19 states where governors and legislatures had refused to expand Medicaid and had no interest in promoting Obamacare. “Any effort to put in dollars for outreach on the federal level,” she said, “were immediately stripped out. ” It’s impossible to know for sure how much of a role the hobbling of Obamacare played in the outcome of the 2014 midterm elections, in which the Republicans captured the Senate and expanded their majority in the House. But Republicans uniformly campaigned against the program, while Democrats found themselves at pains to demonstrate its virtues. As a bonus for Needham and Chapman, Eric Cantor, the House majority leader had been drubbed in the primary by a Tea   Republican. In September 2015, Boehner would step down as well. A month after Boehner resigned, the House considered yet another bill targeting Obamacare. But this one was different from its predecessors. Sponsored by Representative Tom Price, who in just over a year would be Trump’s pick as secretary of Health and Human Services, H. R. 3762 was a “reconciliation bill,” a budgetary measure to defund the health care program that would, in accordance with Senate rules, require only 51 votes to pass in the upper chamber. That threshold was attainable, now that the Republicans had 54 Senate seats. The bigger hurdle was a more arcane one: To qualify for this lower passage threshold as a reconciliation bill, every item in the legislation had to be deemed a budgetary fix, rather than an extraneous provision, by the Senate parliamentarian. Accordingly, it did not include repealing the individual mandate and Medicaid expansion. Better to let the Senate legislative aides confer on those matters with the parliamentarian, one staff member who helped write the bill told me. That approach was not good enough for Needham and Chapman. Heritage Action announced its strong disapproval of the reconciliation bill, instructed members to vote it down and warned that the measure would be  . Insisting that it was “universally acknowledged” that the repeal of the exchange subsidies and Medicaid expansion would qualify as reconcilable items, Heritage Action stated that it would be satisfied with nothing less. The new speaker of the House, Paul Ryan, ignored Heritage Action. On Oct. 23, the reconciliation bill went to the House floor, where all but seven Republicans voted for it. Apoplectic, Needham termed the act a “charade” that “undermines the party’s longstanding position of full repeal. ” He added, “We expect the Senate to do better. ” The Senate Republicans did. Their version of the bill included repeal of the individual mandate and Medicaid expansion. The parliamentarian ruled that both provisions were extraneous and did not therefore qualify in their present form for a   vote. A   version of the bill, which kept the individual mandate and Medicaid expansion but stripped away the ability to enforce either, then passed the Senate and was reapproved by the House. It was sent over to President Obama. On Jan. 8, 2016, he vetoed it. Obama’s final defense of his namesake program would come almost exactly 10 months later, when he received   Trump in the Oval Office and urged him not to eviscerate Obamacare. Obama’s words, Trump said the following day to The Wall Street Journal, had made him reconsider abolishing the law in full. But 10 weeks later, as one of the very first acts of his presidency, Trump signed an executive order whose mission statement was the “prompt repeal” of Obamacare in its entirety. The Affordable Care Act’s approval rating has rarely exceeded 50 percent. And over time, as it has strained under the multitude of compromises that were necessary for its passage, it has proved itself worthy of several of the criticisms aimed at it. Though for 80 percent of health care recipients (including those receiving health care from Medicare, Medicaid or their employers) annual rate increases are at historic lows, for the rest the story has been different. The premiums have been rising because of a variety of structural reasons, and because federal assistance to recipients to offset the costs has been in many cases inadequate. Or, as the   analyst Robert Laszewski puts it, “They created a Cadillac with Chevrolet subsidies. ” But it is also because unit costs have continued to soar  —   like the price of prescription drugs, thanks to the sweetheart deal that the pharmaceutical industry cut with the Democrats in exchange for being an early supporter of the law. Some rural states like Alaska have seen very little competition among insurers  —   something that a public option might have addressed, had the insurance lobby not spent a fortune to defeat that provision. Of the 23 nonprofit insurance   set up by the Affordable Care Act to compete in such areas, only a handful remain  —   probably at least in part because the   received from Congress only $2. 4 billion of the $6 billion originally appropriated to establish them. To make Obamacare economically feasible for insurers, the program needed to attract a large pool of young and healthy recipients to offset the costs of providing care for the older and less healthy. That ratio has yet to prove satisfactory for many insurance companies  —   one of which, Aetna, announced last year that it would be abandoning the program in several states. (Aetna publicly blamed Obamacare, saying that it was losing money participating in the exchanges, but a federal judge ruled that Aetna’s real motive was to escape scrutiny for its possibly illegal merger with Humana, and court documents have shown that the company was making money in some states where it was claiming not to.) Then again, it was always the industry’s expectation that the law would prove flawed in places, and that those shortcomings would be addressed legislatively. As Karen Ignagni, the lead lobbyist for the   industry during the formation and passage of Obamacare and now president and C. E. O. of EmblemHealth, tactfully puts it: “On the Affordable Care Act, there was a strong difference of opinion between Democrats and Republicans going back to the initial days of discussion. And so there was never a  . ” In spite of all this, Obamacare has done far more good than its critics predicted it would. As of 2014, insurers cannot deny coverage to anyone based on their current health status  —   a meaningful protection for the 133 million Americans with chronic illnesses. Over 15 million poor or   citizens are now receiving Medicaid benefits in the 31 states (as well as the District of Columbia) that have opted for this expansion. Another 3 million Americans under the age of 26 have been allowed to stay on their parents’ health care plans, thanks to the provision in the A. C. A. that Heritage Action warmly refers to as the “slacker mandate. ” Meanwhile, during each month that Obamacare has been in existence, the private sector has grown. The bill has not proved to be the “job killer” apocalyptically described by its Republican opponents. Now that the law is in place, trying to tinker with it in a measured fashion, deciding which parts to discard and which to keep, would be more complicated than simply determining what the public likes and what it doesn’t. As Jim McDermott says: “You can’t just reach in and pull out one thing. It’d be like a doctor doing surgery and saying, ‘Well, since you’re not using your spleen today, let’s take it out.’ It’s all wired together in a very complex way. ” That wiring represents, among other things, the compromises worked out with the various players in the health care ecosystem  —   doctors’ and nurses’ associations, hospital groups, insurers, drug companies  —   that enabled the passage of Obamacare in the first place. As Ignagni points out: “It was very unique that all of the different industries were willing to sit at the table and engage in   together. I don’t really recall any time when that has happened in our economy on any issue. ” Collectively, those groups spent close to $273 million on lobbying during the height of the Obamacare debate. They will surely spend a similar sum haranguing Congress to pass a replacement that favors them. Many conservative remedies have been floated over the years and have been consolidated into Speaker Paul Ryan’s   “A Better Way” summation: expanded health savings accounts, assorted tax credits and refunds,   reform, portability of insurance from one job to the next and the ability to purchase insurance across state lines. But the problem for Republicans is that Obamacare’s sweeping coverage has changed the paradigm. Of the 31 states that have opted for expanded Medicaid coverage, 16 have Republican governors. None of these governors have expressed a desire to throw their states’ residents off the rolls. At the same time, the fitful and at times rhetorically muddled transition from the known (Obamacare) to the unknown (“something terrific”) has risked throwing the health care industry into turmoil. The aftershocks are likely to be not only economic but also political. “If you take Obamacare as it looks right now,” says the policy analyst Robert Laszewski, a longtime critic of the legislation, about half of enrollees “don’t get a subsidy because their incomes are too high. They make $90, 000 or $100, 000 a year but are in the individual market. These tend to be Trump supporters. So if he further destabilizes this thing and there are     rate increases, he’ll be screwing his own people. ” Last month, Representative Steve King once again offered his   legislation, maintaining that in doing away with Obamacare, the country would immediately be “far better off,” even if nothing were done to replace it. To King and Heritage Action, failing to seize this moment of opportunity would constitute a grave betrayal. “It’s pretty clear that the conservative base is expecting Congress to do this,” Chapman told me. “If Congress goes back to the voters in 2018 and people are still enrolling in Obamacare, I think that’s going to be disastrous. ” Speaking of the base, Chapman predicted, “They’re basically going to splinter off and create a third party. ” But it took more than the conservative base to elect Donald Trump, and it will take more than them to   many Republican senators and representatives in 2018 and 2020. The rest of the public has begun a decided turn against King’s and Heritage Action’s position. The same Fox News poll last month that found Obamacare’s overall favorability to be 50 percent also found that only 23 percent of respondents favored fully repealing it  —   a new low since the law was signed nearly seven years ago. After Trump remarked to The Washington Post on Jan. 15 that he planned to provide “insurance for everybody,” I thought I had better gauge Michael Needham’s reaction. Taken at face value, Trump did not sound much like a man hellbent on tilting health care policy rightward. “I’m concerned when I hear that kind of talk,” King had told me. “I don’t know how deeply he’s gone into the details. ” But Needham chuckled breezily when I brought up Trump’s statement. “I think right now there’s a lot of people who want to jump on words,” he said. “Everybody wants to ensure every American has access to   health care. That is pretty clearly what Trump was saying. What’s the overused phrase? Trump supporters take him seriously, not literally. ” Nor did it seem to bother him that Republicans on the Hill were in a frenzy to develop a consensus for replacement legislation. Up to now, Needham reminded me, the goal had been to inculcate in the party a ceaseless lust for Obamacare repeal. “For the last eight years,” he said, “it hasn’t made sense to litigate the nuance of, Do you use a tax credit or a tax deduction, or what are your views of  ?” The Republicans might not end up with a single gargantuan replacement bill, and maybe that was as it should be. “We’re probably in an age where smaller, humbler pieces of legislation are easier to get consensus around. ” This struck me as sensible and, at the same time, somewhat naïve. If, as in Heritage Action’s dream scenario, Obamacare were to be immediately vaporized, it would leave a yawning vacuum  —   and the first thing to fill it would be anxiety. Every gruesome case of   families now left to die would be duly chronicled by the media. Legislators would panic  —   but, if recent history is any judge, their reaction would be tame compared with that of the man who now thoroughly owned the   landscape. Was it really so hard, I asked Needham, to imagine Trump faltering under the specter of bad press and equally bad approval ratings and hastily offering up a Trumpcare that bore a suspicious resemblance to Obamacare? Needham paused for a moment before saying, in a vaguely amazed voice: “I’m a little surprised by the question. Right now, I don’t see much evidence of that playing out. ” Trump’s vice president was Mike Pence, “my first hero when I came to Washington. ” Tom Price, the nominee for Health and Human Services secretary, and Mick Mulvaney, whom Trump tapped to run the Office of Management and Budget, were longtime supporters of Heritage Action. The former senator Jim DeMint, Ed Feulner’s replacement as president of the Heritage Foundation, was helping to shape the selection of Trump’s prospective Supreme Court nominees. Trump’s team was loaded with Heritage staff members. All this counted for as much as whatever the new president himself thought. “Richard Viguerie, one of the icons of the conservative movement, said to me that what was great about Reagan was that when he walked into the room, you saw your friends and allies walking with him,” Needham told me. It was a pleasing image, conveying undying fellowship. Yet even Reagan, fierce inveigher against socialized medicine that he was, did not make a dent in Medicare, the program he so loathed, during his two terms in office. Quite the contrary, in fact: He briefly expanded its benefits to include catastrophic care for the elderly before Congress struck down the measure less than a year after Reagan left office. Now came the president whom Needham once accused of embracing socialized medicine. Maybe he would somehow turn out to be a more reliable friend to the conservative movement than Reagan had been. Or maybe Washington would prove, hardly for the first time, that even the best of friends will let you down.



############################################################

2 - Forget the images of men in hard hats standing before factory gates, of men with   faces, of men perched high above New York City on steel beams. The emerging face of the American working class is a Hispanic woman who has never set foot on a factory floor. That’s not the kind of work much of the working class does anymore. Instead of making things, they are more often paid to serve people: to care for someone else’s children or someone else’s parents to clean another family’s home. The decline of the old working class has meant both an economic triumph for the nation and a personal tribulation for many of the workers. Technological progress has made American farms and factories more productive than ever, creating great wealth and cutting the cost of food and most other products. But the work no longer requires large numbers of workers. In 1900, factories and farms employed 60 percent of the work force. By 1950, a   later, those two sectors employed 36 percent. In 2014, they employed less than 10 percent. For more than a century, since the trend was first documented, people have been prophesying a dire future in which the working class would no longer work. In 1964, a group of prominent liberals wrote President Johnson to warn of a “cybernation revolution” inexorably creating “a permanent impoverished and jobless class established in the midst of potential abundance. ” Machines have taken the jobs of millions of Americans, and there is every indication that the trend will continue. In October, Budweiser successfully tested a   truck by delivering beer more than 120 miles to a warehouse in Colorado. In December, Amazon opened a small convenience store near its Seattle headquarters that has no cashiers. Customers  —   for now, Amazon employees only  —   are billed automatically as they leave the store. In January, Bank of America opened branches in Denver and Minneapolis that are staffed by a lone employee, A. T. M.s and video terminals. And Americans are making a growing share of purchases online: about 8. 4 percent of retail sales in 2016. These changes are driven by consumer preferences, not just by corporate   imperatives. People like shopping in bed in the middle of the night. People like that computers make fewer mistakes. And people grow accustomed to computers. A few years ago, I watched a woman walk up to a bank teller and ask where she could find an A. T. M. The teller asked if she could help. No, the woman said, she just needed to withdraw some money. But the forecasters were wrong in the most important respect. Workers continue to find work, but now the jobs are in service. Taking care of aging baby boomers, in particular, has become by far the largest driver of job growth in the American economy. Among the occupations the Bureau of Labor Statistics expects to grow most rapidly over the next decade:   assistants, home health aides,   assistants, nurse practitioners, physical therapists,   aides, physician assistants. . .. You get the idea. Nine of the 12   fields are different ways of saying “nurse. ” In 1950, service work made up about 40 percent of   labor in the United States. By 2005, that share had climbed to 56 percent, according to data from a 2013 analysis by the economists David Autor at M. I. T. and David Dorn at the University of Zurich. The available evidence, Autor said, suggests that this trend has continued “very rapidly” over the last decade, increasing the share of American workers who work in the service industries. The rise of   employment reflects the fact that Americans on average have more money to spend and that we are spending relatively less of that money on physical goods, because those goods have become cheaper. It took 10. 5 hours of work at average wages to buy a bicycle in 1979 it took just four hours in 2015. Most Americans don’t want a second and third bicycle, so that leaves more money for other purposes. And increasingly, the money is spent on services: help around the home, entertainment and vacations and, most of all, education and health care. These jobs are difficult to mechanize or to perform with greater efficiency. Convalescents cannot be trained to eat more quickly. A phlebotomist cannot draw blood from two arms at once. Robots, as yet, cannot change diapers. Moreover, consumers may have an emotional investment in seeing this caring work performed by people rather than machines. They may be willing to pay for a personal touch. Another limitation on our ability to program computers to do the work of people is summarized by the observation of the Hungarian scientist Michael Polanyi that “we can know more than we can tell. ” Consider the work of a security guard, who is basically tasked with sounding the alarm if something doesn’t seem right. Technology improves security, but it is not easy to write a formula approximating intuition. The Cassandras, however, were right to warn about poverty in the midst of abundance.   providers  —   “servants,” as they once were called  —   tend to be poorly paid. There is little job security the benefits are meager the work is physically demanding and emotionally draining. It is not particularly surprising that women and immigrants have been more likely to take these jobs than   men. For many of the caretaking service jobs, less than 10 percent of the work force is male. The wages of service work increasingly determine the welfare of the American working class and, to a substantial degree, the broader economy. But politicians have paid little attention. That’s partly because Americans continue to view service work as a way station, not a way of life. Teenagers get their first job at McDonald’s mothers dip back into the work force as receptionists seniors make a little extra money as Walmart greeters. The reality is that these are the kinds of jobs millions of Americans hold for their entire working lives. And increasingly, these are the jobs their children will perform, too.  —  Binyamin Appelbaum  Santa Clara, Calif. • The Home Health Aide By Elise Craig Two major events in Ofelia Bersabe’s life persuaded her to become a home health aide. In 2008, the Bay Area electronics company where she worked for 21 years as a   supervisor let her go in a mass layoff. And that same year, her mother, whom she followed to the United States from the Philippines nearly two decades earlier, died. “When she passed away in my arms, I felt that I hadn’t given her the full attention I wanted to,” Bersabe said. “I promised myself that I would concentrate on taking care of women, especially seniors. In that way, I feel like I’m still taking care of her. ” Nine years later, at age 69, Bersabe is among nearly a million Americans who work as home health aides, a field that is expected to grow 38 percent by 2024, faster than most other occupations, thanks in large part to the aging   population. Already a senior herself, Bersabe works 65 hours a week caring for two elderly clients with dementia. She spends five   and   night shifts in her clients’ homes, providing companionship, reminders to take medicine and light housekeeping for one client, and everything from bathing and dressing to diaper changing for the other. Having two jobs is partly a necessity and partly a hedge should one of her clients die, she can still rely on income from the other. She also needs the money. Because she is a member of the Service Employees International Union Local 2015, the agencies that Bersabe works for pay her $16. 13 and $11 an hour. California’s current minimum wage is $10. 50, but the living wage for someone like Bersabe is $11. 29. Bersabe is grateful for the money and has no complaints about her wages, but she acknowledges that making a living in the Bay Area’s technology bubble is tough. She lost her house after the 2008 layoff, and she and her husband, who works nights as a security guard, now share a   apartment rental behind Levi’s Stadium, where the 49ers play, with two other elderly couples. The gratitude Bersabe’s clients show her  —   one kisses her when she arrives  —   is incredibly fulfilling, she said, but the work is hard. Dementia patients can be very unpredictable. “I have a very tame cat, and when they start to have  ”  —   the   confusion that can be a symptom of dementia  —   “I have a wild tiger,” she said. “But it’s not the person herself, it’s the sickness. ” Once, when a client began to get agitated and yell at Bersabe, she sneaked around to the front door and rang the doorbell. The client welcomed Bersabe as an old friend that she hadn’t seen in a long time. Bersabe expects to work through her 70s and 80s and maybe even into her 90s. “I’ll work as long as I can stand on my own two legs,” she said. “As long as I can drive and walk and God permits me, I’ll enjoy the job I love. ” Bersabe has no intention of being a burden to her three children, who have families of their own and are scattered from Kentucky to the Philippines. “Honestly, I am thinking, when the time comes, who is going to take care of me?” she said. “I don’t want to bother my kids. I want them to see me as a kicking woman, like I was before. ” Elise Craig is a freelance writer and editor based in San Francisco. Brooklyn • The Hair Braider By Jazmine Hughes On a recent visit to Jennifer’s Beauty World, in Flatbush, Brooklyn, Sonia Ufot started by detangling my tightly coiled hair and   it   then she parted a small section into an individual plait, wrapped a section of filler hair around the root and braided it straight down for 16 inches. She repeated this step around 80 more times, over the course of about six hours, all that time spent either standing or hunched over on a high stool. “It takes time and patience for you to be able to stand on your feet for hours to braid somebody’s hair,” she said, “so you really have to love doing it. ” Ufot, 38, has known how to braid since she was 15 she picked up the skill in Warri, Nigeria, where she was born. A family friend owned a braiding shop, and she visited every day, watching the women do their work and, eventually, persuading them to let her practice on their customers’ heads. She majored in economics at Delta State University in Nigeria, but while she was at school, she found out she had thyroid cancer and eventually moved to the United States for treatment. She started braiding hair for the money and never returned to economics. “There’s more money doing hair,” she told me. And because she’s in such high demand, Ufot can work 12 to 15 hour days, sometimes seven days a week, depending on appointments. She charges between $100 to $250 for each style, depending on its intricacy. She hasn’t gone on vacation in five years. Unlike most people trained in cosmetology, braiders, many of whom are immigrants, don’t use chemicals, sharp objects or heat just a comb, oil, water and their hands. Individual states legislate the requirements for becoming a licensed hair braider in several, braiders  —   even those with a   knowledge of braiding  —   are required to complete more than 2, 000 hours of training at cosmetology schools, which can cost tens of thousands of dollars and whose classes have almost nothing to do with styling black women’s hair. Many cosmetology schools don’t even offer braiding instruction. In 2016, Iowa ended its   requirement for hair braiders, allowing them instead to pass basic    exams with the state Nebraska, too, recently ended its laborious stipulation of 2, 100 hours of cosmetology training for natural hair braiders. In New York, braiders are required to obtain a   license, which allows the stylists to perform the   techniques of styling black hair  —   for example, shampooing hair, applying extensions, making dreadlocks, braiding  —   and not much else. It costs about $70 and mandates schooling, which costs more. But many braiders operate without licenses. Ufot wants to go to cosmetology school her goal is to enroll by year’s end, if she can get enough financial aid. She figures it will cost her about $15, 000, so she’ll continue braiding and attend night classes as long she can get someone to look after her    daughter. She told me that she wants to learn how to do all types of hair  —   dyeing, perms  —   and dreams of owning her own shop. “I want to get my cosmetology license so I’m able to do all of the things,” she told me, laughing. “I want to be able to cut white people’s hair!” Jazmine Hughes is an associate editor for the magazine. Cicero, Ill. • The   Worker By Ben Austen Adriana Alvarez was leaving her McDonald’s at the end of a daylong shift in 2014 when a man stopped her in the parking lot. She’d noticed him inside, buying coffee, and now he asked if she’d heard about the Fight for $15. Laughing, she said $15 an hour for   work sounded crazy. She was racing to pick up her son Manny from day care, but she talked with the guy later that evening. She told him that she earned $8. 50 an hour, just 25 cents above the Illinois minimum wage. She’d been at the same McDonald’s in Cicero, a largely Latino town west of Chicago, for about four years. In all that time, she had one raise: 10 cents. The man explained that she’d been cheated even out of her low pay: Workers at restaurants had been required, illegally, to punch out before tallying up their registers or breaking down   boxes. “I think about it now,” Alvarez says. “God, I was stupid. ” A few weeks after meeting the organizer, Alvarez said, she and her   handed in a petition demanding that the store manager show them more respect in front of customers. Not only did the yelling stop, she said, but they soon received a raise of as much as 75 cents. “Pushing works,” Alvarez says she learned. In March 2014, she joined her first rally, a multicity coordinated Fight for $15 day of action. Alvarez is now 24 and still works at the same McDonald’s. Nationally, jobs in retail and food services outnumber those in manufacturing by more than two to one. The country’s largest private employers include Walmart, McDonald’s, Kroger and the conglomeration of KFC, Pizza Hut and Taco Bell. These chains are no longer places just for teenagers to work part time: The average age of a   employee has climbed to 29 like Alvarez, a third of them have spent some time in college. Fight for $15 doesn’t operate like a traditional union: There are no contracts with employers, and Alvarez and others pay no dues. The Service Employees International Union has been its primary source of funding from its inception in New York City, in 2012. Yet Fight for $15 organizers take credit for winning wage increases for 22 million workers in America. Although the federal minimum wage of $7. 25 hasn’t budged since 2009, numerous cities and states since 2012 have raised their base pay to $12, $13 and even $15 an hour. Under President Trump, the effort is sure to face additional hurdles. But Fight for $15 helped lead the campaign to derail Trump’s first pick for labor secretary, Andrew Puzder, organizing workers from his   chains to march on their stores and to share their stories of wage theft. Low pay is an issue that crosses party lines: Two of every five U. S. workers earn less than $15 an hour. Today Alvarez makes $11 an hour at McDonald’s. She has never been put on the schedule for a full   week she receives no benefits, health coverage or overtime. Yet the raise has allowed her to replace the moldering floorboards in her basement apartment. And Alvarez has been transformed in other ways by the labor fight. She has emerged as one of its spokeswomen, and the job has taken on a new significance. “When people say we should go back to school, I say the adjunct professors who joined us went to school,” Alvarez said. “How come they’re not doing better? I’m not just serving customers. I’m also serving these innocent ladies”  —   her    —   “who might not be conscious of their rights. I’m like their protector. ” Ben Austen is working on a book about Chicago’s     complex. 4. Stuart Culver Brooklyn Park, Minn. • The Delivery Driver By Jaime Lowe Stuart Culver starts his overnight shift for O’Reilly Auto Parts at 7 p. m. and finishes about nine hours later. A relay driver, he exchanges freight  —   mufflers, batteries, drums of   fluid  —   with another driver in La Crosse, Wis. and then makes deliveries to five stores on his route. The road has changed over the two decades that he has been driving trucks. “In today’s day and age, it’s really stressful,” he says. “You’re a lot more likely to be struck because of other drivers using their cellphone. ” The regulatory landscape has changed, too. Every year, for example, Culver has to undergo a Department of Transportation physical, because he has sleep apnea. In recent years, online giants like Amazon have pushed for   delivery times, sometimes delivering orders on the same day. As consumers increase their online shopping  —   total retail sales in the United States increased only 2. 9 percent last year, but online sales rose 15. 1 percent  —   distribution networks have adapted by integrating more and more consumer destinations into their systems. Mark Merz, a spokesman for O’Reilly, attributes part of the company’s success to “having inventory immediately available when a customer needs those parts. ” Though O’Reilly extended its reach to 4, 829 stores in 47 states last year and revenue surpassed $8. 5 billion, that growth hasn’t led to an expansion of its work force or changed the nature of its jobs. “We’ve been   for over six months,” Culver says. “Guys are doing extra work and taking on extra stores for their routes. ” Culver, who belongs to the Teamsters Local 120, says he is not paid by the amount of time it takes him to complete his deliveries but according to the route driven, which varies from year to year. Culver says he made roughly $53, 000 last year, earning almost $23 an hour. “Our wages haven’t really gone up in the same way that other jobs’ wages have gone up,” he says. “I have to go to special school to get my license, and how we’re treated and looked at hasn’t really changed in 20 years. ” Culver, who is 56, doesn’t expect that technology will eliminate work like his. “I don’t see how automatic truck drivers are going to work,” he says. “There are so many variables. ” O’Reilly still needs people to operate the electric pallet jacks and hydraulic liftgates at the rear of their delivery trucks, still relies on backs and arms to unload and inspect orders. Despite the toll the work has taken on Culver  —   two operations to fuse vertebrae in his neck and a   operation  —   he says he likes the job. “I’m happy doing this, I enjoy what I do,” he says. “I hope I can make it to 65. ” Jaime Lowe is a freelance writer and a frequent contributor to the magazine. Las Vegas • The   Rep By Eric Steuer When Sandi Dolan moved to Las Vegas in 2014, to escape the cold Colorado winters, she’d been working primarily as a   representative for more than a decade in the insurance industry. Dolan is remarkably upbeat, and she says she genuinely enjoys helping strangers solve problems. But she said that day after day of calls about accidents and claims made for a pretty depressing gig. “No one ever wants to talk to their insurance company,” she said. “It’s never a good phone call. ” Not long after landing in Las Vegas, Dolan started looking for a job. She found a   opening with Zappos, the online    retailer. “I actually didn’t know anything about the company,” she said. “But after I was hired, I started talking to locals, and people were like: ‘You have no idea, do you? We all tried to get in there. ’’u2009” Zappos has more than 500 people on its   team, about a third of the company’s total staff. Most employees work together in the company’s headquarters, a   building downtown that used to be Las Vegas’s city hall. Employees like Dolan, who work the phones, start at $14 an hour, about a dollar less than the median wage earned by the more than 2. 5 million Americans who work as   representatives. But Dolan, who makes slightly more than that, points out that, unlike at many other companies, most Zappos workers are   employees who receive benefits like health insurance and retirement plans. At Zappos, employees are encouraged to interact with   throughout the business and eat together on campus. The company frequently hosts events, ranging from product demonstrations to scavenger hunts, which are open to all employees. Dolan said this is one thing that makes her current work so much better than previous jobs. “I’ve been in places where I wasn’t even allowed to take a break with someone if they were a different pay grade than I was,” she said. Another difference from Dolan’s previous   jobs is that Zappos reps aren’t limited in the amount of time they are allowed to spend on each conversation. “At other jobs, I’d be stressed because I’d have to resolve each call in about five minutes in order to make my numbers,” Dolan said. She knows she could be making more money somewhere else, but she wouldn’t enjoy her day as much. “I figured I’d do this for six months just to get something local on my résumé so I could look for something else,” she said. “But I haven’t looked for a job since I stepped foot in here. I don’t plan on it. ” Eric Steuer is a contributing writer for Wired based in San Francisco. Columbus, Ohio • The Meat Cutter By Abe Streep Every day at 2 p. m. Ruhatijuru Sebatutsi, a Congolese refugee, rides a bus from outside Columbus, Ohio, where he lives with his wife and eight children, with 10 of his colleagues. The bus travels 40 miles southwest to Washington Court House, population about 14, 000, and drops its passengers near a plant owned by the SugarCreek Packing Company, which produces pork and poultry products like bacon bits and sausage patties. Just before 4, Sebatutsi, 40, changes into the uniform of a meat cutter: cap, gloves and scrubs. Then he takes his place in a line of men and women from Myanmar, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Bhutan and rural Ohio. Sebatutsi fled war in Congo as a teenager and spent most of his life in Rwanda’s sprawling Gihembe refugee camp before being relocated to Ohio in 2015. Once the shift starts, he pushes meat through cutting machines. “You push again and again,” he told me through a translator. “It doesn’t require a lot of knowledge. ” There are three breaks per   shift: 15 minutes early on, a   meal break, then 10 minutes toward the end. At 1 a. m. he takes the bus home. When he arrives, his wife and children are sleeping. He works seven days a week, making $11. 50 an hour, time and a half on Saturdays and double on Sundays. “I am so lucky,” he said. Central Ohio is particularly welcoming to refugees, having resettled more than 17, 000 since 1983. In November 2016, the region became a flash point for those opposed to resettlement when a   Ohio State University student was killed by police after attacking pedestrians. Still, in early February, the Columbus mayor, Andrew Ginther, signed an executive order supporting the resettlement of refugees. His reasons were economic as well as altruistic. Nearly 12 percent of Columbus is  . According to a recent study from the New American Economy, a nonprofit    group,   immigrants pay $1. 2 billion a year in taxes and have an annual spending power of $3. 2 billion. They work as doctors and engineers, open small businesses employing thousands, perform manual labor in warehouses and frequently do the jobs that many other Americans will not, like meatpacking. SugarCreek is one of many meatpacking businesses nationwide that have turned to refugees. Last spring, the company approached Community Refugee and Immigration Services (CRIS) a Columbus   resettlement agency. “They needed people,” said CRIS’s Marcus Gorman, who arranges employment for the newly resettled. “They had a lot of opportunities for   workers, and they were accustomed to working with folks that spoke little to no English. ” Now, Gorman said, about 65 of CRIS’s clients work at SugarCreek. Since Sebatutsi started last November, he has opted to work every day, which he said is the best part of the job. “There’s a lot of overtime, and you can make money. ” But, he added, “that’s also the worst thing. ” He is no longer able to join his family at church. All that pushing, slicing and packaging is repetitive, but it’s far better than life in Gihembe. “The kids can ask you for something, you cannot provide,” he said. “But here you work, you take care of your problems, you do something for yourself. ” Abe Streep is a contributing editor for Outside and a contributing writer for The California Sunday Magazine. Dalton, Ga. • The Carpet Whisperer By Lizzie O’Leary The warehouse where Guadalupe Guido works is so bright inside that it feels like noon no matter the time of day. Huge metal racks hold row after row of carpet that will be trucked from this plant in Dalton, Ga. all over the United States. Dalton calls itself the Carpet Capital of the World, and everyone in Guido’s family  —   her mother, father, sister and herself  —   work for one of Dalton’s carpet companies. Guido, who is 23 and goes by Lupe, has been working at Engineered Floors for almost two years. She has risen quickly, starting on yarn machines, before driving a Hyster forklift, working as a production clerk and now serving as a tufting scheduler. She creates orders, dictating the type of yarn to use and how much footage of carpet each job will need. “Without this person,” she said of her role, “there really is no show. ” In the political sphere, manufacturing work is often associated with men, and specifically white men. But women have always worked in carpets in Dalton and at Engineered Floors. And Dalton is about 50 percent Latino, which is reflected in the work force here. Many people in the city came from Mexico in the 1970s and ’80s to work in the industry, including Guido’s parents, Jose and Martina. Lupe Guido was born in Dalton and dreamed initially of becoming a lawyer. “I talk a lot,” she said with a laugh. But at 18, she wanted independence and her own money and went to work at Mohawk Industries, one of the largest carpet companies in the city, where her mother still works. It was not what her parents had in mind. “When I was growing up, it was always: ‘Go to school, go to school,’’u2009” she said. “’u2009‘You don’t want to be working how I’m working. ’’u2009” But the carpet industry, like most of American manufacturing, has undergone radical changes. The hardest and most dangerous jobs are now performed by machines that are mostly run by computers, and those computers are watched over by people like Guido. Engineered Floors is new in comparison to Mohawk or Shaw Industries, the two companies that have dominated Dalton for decades. But Guido has been able to move up quickly. She earns $15. 50 an hour, up from $11 an hour when she started in 2015. At the end of each year, she gets a $500 bonus. Guido said she would like to stay at Engineered Floors if she can. To do so requires vigilantly managing her time so that she can move up. She’s awake at 6 a. m. clocks into her job at 7 and works a   shift until 5 p. m. After dinner with her fiancé, who also works in the carpet industry, Guido spends her nights studying for a bachelor’s degree in   management at Georgia Northwestern Technical College. One day, she wants to be a department manager or a plant manager. “The way I’ve been growing and growing,” she said, “I don’t want for that to stop. ” Lizzie O’Leary is the host of the radio program “Marketplace Weekend. ” More reporting by O’Leary and the producer Eliza Mills about the carpet industry in Dalton, Ga. is on Marketplace Weekend. Las Vegas • The Hotel Cleaner By Amanda Fortini Most mornings, Wendy Almada  —   a   attendant, or G. R. A. at the Aria Resort and Casino on the Las Vegas Strip  —   puts on a pair of latex gloves and tackles the bathroom first. “I don’t like to do beds,” she said. “I like to clean bathrooms. ” Next she yanks off the sheets, bags them and makes up the bed. She dusts, vacuums, empties the garbage. If a light bulb is out or the carpet needs to be shampooed, she puts in a work order. She scans the room for any last detail that she might have overlooked, then clocks out and moves on to the next one. She cleans 13 rooms a day, with suites counting as two or three. Sometimes the job is that straightforward, but often she opens the door to find what all G. R. A.s dread: a “trashed” room. “They eat and they leave all the trash everywhere: cans, food,” she said, gesturing with her hands. She was seated at a folding table in a trailer parked in the lot of the Las Vegas Culinary Workers Union. “Especially the bachelor party. Oh, my God, those are bad. ” Because she is a member of the union, the job pays her $17. 65 an hour. The Culinary Workers Union Local 226, chartered in 1935, is the largest union in Nevada, representing 57, 000 men and women from 167 countries (its membership is 56 percent Latino and 81 percent people of color) among them cooks, bartenders, cocktail servers, porters, bellmen and   attendants. The average wage of a   worker is $23 an hour, compared with the $10 an hour made by a nonunionized Las Vegas hospitality worker or the $6 an hour Almada, who is 42 and who moved to the United States from the Mexico border town of Agua Prieta (she got her green card when she was 11, and became a citizen when she was 22) was paid at her last job in a    factory in Tucson. She said she was fired from that job for taking two months’ maternity leave, which prompted her and her (now former) husband to move to Las Vegas. They had heard that there were jobs at the casinos, where 90 percent of the hospitality work force on the Strip belong to the culinary union. But it was only after they divorced and she needed to support herself and her three children that Almada applied for her job at the Aria. That was six years ago. Almada enumerates all the ways that the job and its attendant union membership has improved her life: free health insurance and pharmacy benefits a pension job security and soon a $20, 000 down payment she will use to buy her first house. Initially she didn’t understand the benefits and regulations the union conferred. This is a common reason workers can still be taken advantage of, particularly those who don’t speak English. For the past seven months, though, Almada has been on an extended, contractually allowed,   leave of absence to serve as an organizer at Mandalay Bay Casino she is teaching other workers to read and understand their own contracts. “I never had these rights in Arizona,” she said. “Because I had my little one, they fired me and nobody helped me. If I was working here with the union, that doesn’t happen to me. ” Amanda Fortini is a contributing editor at Elle magazine and a visiting lecturer at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. Boston • The Pipe Fitter By Carlo Rotella From the job site in Roxbury where he works as a union pipe fitter, Nate Awan can see the building that once housed the Phillis Wheatley Middle School, from which he was expelled for fighting and other misbehavior. “That was back in my knucklehead time,” he said. The fifth child of an overwhelmed single mother, Awan was kicked out of four schools and took a bullet in the shoulder before going to prison at 18 for trying to shoot a rival gang member. While serving a   sentence, he resolved that he would change his fate. With the help of a former prosecutor who took an interest in his rehabilitation, Awan found his way into Operation Exit, a program founded in 2014 in which the city of Boston partners with unions to channel residents with criminal backgrounds into the trades. Having sampled carpentry,   work and other options, Awan, who had always been fascinated by welding but doesn’t like heights, chose pipe fitting over iron work. There’s plenty of politics in the building trades, but there’s also an ethos of craft meritocracy. “It’s not what you look like, it’s what your clevis hangers look like,” Awan said, referring to the brackets used to support pipes. “All at the same level, nothing crooked. It’s about your work ethic. ” He’s already planning to get his    son into the local when he’s old enough. Awan, who is 28 and currently a   apprentice making $30 an hour plus benefits, can become a journeyman in three years, and he looks forward to continuing up the scale of seniority and pay toward the top rate of $50 or so an hour. He still lives near the Four Corners section of Dorchester where he grew up, but he’s shopping for a house outside the city. “You come from no money for food, nothing, to where you’re buying a house, buying a car,” he said. “Your son needs a school uniform, you can get him one. ” Boston’s mayor, Martin Walsh, intends Operation Exit to enable this kind of transformation of prospects and consciousness. Walsh, who also grew up in Dorchester and had his own troubles (a bullet grazed his leg) before putting his life on course in the building trades, says: “We’ve had 80 graduates come through this program, and we’re expanding from the building trades into coding and culinary arts. Some of these guys were impact players on the street. It has an effect. ” Programs that reduce crime by connecting offenders and potential offenders to meaningful work are getting more attention across the country. Some, like Operation Exit, focus on   after prison others, like the Chicago CRED initiative recently started by the Emerson Collective and Arne Duncan, the former U. S. secretary of education, try to reduce gun violence by teaching job and life skills to young men adrift from both school and the labor market. It takes a significant investment of time and resources to shift a life from a   trajectory to a viable future in this way, but Awan testifies to the approach’s effectiveness. “I’m no surgeon or   prosecutor,” he said, “but for me  —   a product of his environment, taken from my mother at 9, incarcerated at 18, sweeping and mopping in the hole in prison for 19 cents an hour, living like a peasant  —   this here is a lottery ticket. ” Carlo Rotella is the director of American studies at Boston College and the author, most recently, of “Playing in Time. ”

2 - President Trump on Thursday announced his new nominee for labor secretary, Alexander Acosta, during a news conference at the White House. Following is a transcript of that event, as prepared by the Federal News Service. For more coverage, read our live analysis. TRUMP: Thank you very much. I just wanted to begin by mentioning that the nominee for secretary of the Department of Labor will be Mr. Alex Acosta. He has a law degree from Harvard Law School, was a great student former clerk for Justice Samuel Alito. And he has had a tremendous career. He’s a member and has been a member of the National Labor Relations Board, and has been through Senate confirmation three times, confirmed did very, very well. And so Alex, I’ve wished him the best. We just spoke. And he’s going to be  —   I think he’ll be a tremendous secretary of labor. And also as you probably heard just a little while ago, Mick Mulvaney, former congressman, has just been approved weeks late, I have to say that, weeks, weeks late, Office of Management and Budget. And he will be I think a fantastic addition. Paul Singer just left. As you know, Paul was very much involved with the   or as they say, “never Trump. ” And Paul just left and he’s given us his total support. And it’s all about unification. We’re unifying the party and hopefully we’re going to be able to unify the country. It’s very important to me. I’ve been talking about that for a long time. It’s very, very important to me. So I want to thank Paul Singer for being here and for coming up to the office. He was a very strong opponent, and now he’s a very strong ally. And I appreciate that. I think I’ll say a few words, and then we’ll take some questions. And I had this time. We’ve been negotiating a lot of different transactions to save money on contracts that were terrible, including airplane contracts that were out of control and late and terrible just absolutely catastrophic in terms of what was happening. And we’ve done some really good work. We’re very proud of that. And then right after that, you prepare yourselves, we’ll do some questions, unless you have enough questions. That’s always a possibility. I’m here today to update the American people on the incredible progress that has been made in the last four weeks since my inauguration. We have made incredible progress. I don’t think there’s ever been a president elected who in this short period of time has done what we’ve done. A new Rasmussen poll, in fact  —   because the people get it  —   much of the media doesn’t get it. They actually get it, but they don’t write it. Let’s put it that way. But a new Rasmussen poll just came out just a very short while ago, and it has our approval rating at 55 percent and going up. The stock market has hit record numbers, as you know. And there has been a tremendous surge of optimism in the business world, which is  —   to me means something much different than it used to. It used to mean, “Oh, that’s good. ” Now it means, “That’s good for jobs. ” Very different. Plants and factories are already starting to move back into the United States, and big league  —   Ford, General Motors, so many of them. I’m making this presentation directly to the American people, with the media present, which is an honor to have you. This morning, because many of our nation’s reporters and folks will not tell you the truth, and will not treat the wonderful people of our country with the respect that they deserve. And I hope going forward we can be a little bit  —   a little bit different, and maybe get along a little bit better, if that’s possible. Maybe it’s not, and that’s OK, too. TRUMP: Unfortunately, much of the media in Washington, D. C. along with New York, Los Angeles in particular, speaks not for the people, but for the special interests and for those profiting off a very, very obviously broken system. The press has become so dishonest that if we don’t talk about, we are doing a tremendous disservice to the American people. Tremendous disservice. We have to talk to find out what’s going on, because the press honestly is out of control. The level of dishonesty is out of control. I ran for president to present the citizens of our country. I am here to change the broken system so it serves their families and their communities well. I am talking  —   and really talking on this very entrenched power structure, and what we’re doing is we’re talking about the power structure we’re talking about its entrenchment. As a result, the media is going through what they have to go through too often times distort  —   not all the time  —   and some of the media is fantastic, I have to say  —   they’re honest and fantastic. But much of it is not a  —   the distortion  —   and we’ll talk about it, you’ll be able to ask me questions about it. But we’re not going to let it happen, because I’m here again, to take my message straight to the people. As you know, our administration inherited many problems across government and across the economy. To be honest, I inherited a mess. It’s a mess. At home and abroad, a mess. Jobs are pouring out of the country you see what’s going on with all of the companies leaving our country, going to Mexico and other places, low pay, low wages, mass instability overseas, no matter where you look. The Middle East is a disaster. North Korea  —   we’ll take care of it folks we’re going to take care of it all. I just want to let you know, I inherited a mess. Beginning on day one, our administration went to work to tackle these challenges. On foreign affairs, we’ve already begun enormously productive talks with many foreign leaders, much of it you’ve covered, to move forward towards stability, security and peace in the most troubled regions of the world, which there are many. We have had great conversations with the United Kingdom, and meetings. Israel, Mexico, Japan, China and Canada, really, really productive conversations. I would say far more productive than you would understand. We’ve even developed a new council with Canada to promote women’s business leaders and entrepreneurs. It’s very important to me, very important to my daughter Ivanka. I have directed our defense community headed by our great general, now Secretary Mattis. He’s over there now working very hard to submit a plan for the defeat of ISIS, a group that celebrates the murder and torture of innocent people in large sections of the world. It used to be a small group, now it’s in large sections of the world. They’ve spread like cancer. ISIS has spread like cancer  —   another mess I inherited. And we have imposed new sanctions on the nation of Iran, whose totally taken advantage of our previous administration, and they’re the world’s top sponsor of terrorism, and we’re not going to stop until that problem is properly solved. And it’s not properly solved now, it’s one of the worst agreements I’ve ever seen drawn by anybody. I’ve ordered plan to begin building for the massive rebuilding of the United States military. Had great support from the Senate, I’ve had great from Congress, generally. We’ve pursued this rebuilding in the hopes that we will never have to use this military, and I will tell you that is my  —   I would be so happy if we never had to use it. But our country will never have had a military like the military we’re about to build and rebuild. We have the greatest people on earth in our military, but they don’t have the right equipment and their equipment is old. I used it I talked about it at every stop. Depleted, it’s depleted  —   it won’t be depleted for long. And I think one of the reason I’m standing here instead of other people is that frankly, I talked about we have to have a strong military. We have to have a strong law enforcement also. So we do not go abroad in the search of war, we really are searching for peace, but its peace through strength. At home, we have begun the monumental task of returning the government back to the people on a scale not seen in many, many years. In each of these actions, I’m keeping my promises to the American people. These are campaign promises. Some people are so surprised that we’re having strong borders. Well, that’s what I’ve been talking about for a year and a half, strong borders. They’re so surprised, oh, he having strong borders, well that’s what I’ve been talking about to the press and to everybody else. One promise after another after years of politicians lying to you to get elected. They lied to the American people in order to get elected. Some of the things I’m doing probably aren’t popular but they’re necessary for security and for other reasons. And then coming to Washington and pursuing their own interests which is more important to many politicians. I’m here following through on what I pledged to do. That’s all I’m doing. I put it out before the American people, got 306 Electoral College votes. I wasn’t supposed to get 222. They said there’s no way to get 222, 230’s impossible. 270 which you need, that was laughable. We got 306 because people came out and voted like they’ve never seen before so that’s the way it goes. I guess it was the biggest Electoral College win since Ronald Reagan. In other words, the media’s trying to attack our administration because they know we are following through on pledges that we made and they’re not happy about it for whatever reason. And  —   but a lot of people are happy about it. In fact, I’ll be in Melbourne, Florida five o’clock on Saturday and I heard  —   just heard that the crowds are massive that want to be there. I turn on the T. V. open the newspapers and I see stories of chaos. Chaos. Yet it is the exact opposite. This administration is running like a   machine, despite the fact that I can’t get my cabinet approved. And they’re outstanding people like Senator Dan Coats who’s there, one of the most respected men of the Senate. He can’t get approved. How do you not approve him? He’s been a colleague  —   highly respected. Brilliant guy, great guy, everybody knows it. We’re waiting for approval. So we have a wonderful group of people that’s working very hard, that’s being very much misrepresented about and we can’t let that happen. So, if the Democrats who have  —   all you have to do is look at where they are right now. The only thing they can do is delay because they screwed things up royally, believe me. Let me list to you some of the things that we’ve done in just a short period of time. I just got here. And I got here with no cabinet. Again, each of these actions is a promise I made to the American people. I’ll go over just some of them and we have a lot happening next week and in the weeks  —   in the weeks coming. We’ve withdrawn from the   disaster known as Trans Pacific Partnership. We’re going to make trade deals but we’re going to have one on one deals, bilateral. We’re going to have one on one deals. We’ve directed the elimination of regulations that undermine manufacturing and call for expedited approval of the permits needed for America and American infrastructure and that means plant, equipment, roads, bridges, factories. People take 10, 15, 20 years to get disapproved for a factory. They go in for a permit, it’s many, many years. And then at the end of the process  —   they spend 10s of millions of dollars on nonsense and at the end of the process, they get rejected. Now, they may be rejected with me but it’s going to be a quick rejection. Not going to take years. But mostly it’s going to be an acceptance. We want plants built and we want factories built and we want the jobs. We don’t want the jobs going to other countries. We’ve imposed a hiring freeze on nonessential federal workers. We’ve imposed a temporary moratorium on new federal regulations. We’ve issued a   new rule that says for each one new regulation, two old regulations must be eliminated. Makes sense. Nobody’s ever seen regulations like we have. You go to other countries and you look at indexes (ph) they have and you say “let me see your regulations” and they’re fraction, just a tiny fraction of what we have. And I want regulations because I want safety, I want environmental  —   all environmental situations to be taken properly care of. It’s very important to me. But you don’t need four or five or six regulations to take care of the same thing. We’ve stood up for the men and women of law enforcement, directing federal agencies to ensure they are protected from crimes of violence. We’ve directed the creation of a task force for reducing violent crime in America, including the horrendous situation  —   take a look at Chicago and others, taking place right now in our inner cities. Horrible. We’ve ordered the Department of Homeland Security and Justice to coordinate on a plan to destroy criminal cartels coming into the United States with drugs. We’re becoming a drug infested nation. Drugs are becoming cheaper than candy bars. We are not going to let it happen any longer. We’ve undertaken the most substantial border security measures in a generation to keep our nation and our tax dollars safe. And are now in the process of beginning to build a promised wall on the southern border, met with general  —   now Secretary Kelly yesterday and we’re starting that process. And the wall is going to be a great wall and it’s going to be a wall negotiated by me. The price is going to come down just like it has on everything else I’ve negotiated for the government. And we are going to have a wall that works, not gonna have a wall like they have now which is either nonexistent or a joke. We’ve ordered a crackdown on sanctuary cities that refuse to comply with federal law and that harbor criminal aliens, and we have ordered an end to the policy of catch and release on the border. No more release. No matter who you are, release. We have begun a nationwide effort to remove criminal aliens, gang members, drug dealers and others who pose a threat to public safety. We are saving American lives every single day. The court system has not made it easy for us. And are even creating a new office in Homeland Security dedicated to the forgotten American victims of illegal immigrant violence, which there are many. We have taken decisive action to keep radical Islamic terrorists out of our country. No parts are necessary and constitutional actions were blocked by judges, in my opinion, incorrect, and unsafe ruling. Our administration is working night and day to keep you safe, including reporters safe. And is vigorously defending this lawful order. I will not back down from defending our country. I got elected on defense of our country. I keep my campaign promises, and our citizens will be very happy when they see the result. They already are, I can tell you that. Extreme vetting will be put in place and it already is in place in many places. In fact, we had to go quicker than we thought because of the bad decision we received from a circuit that has been overturned at a record number. I have heard 80 percent, I find that hard to believe, that is just a number I heard, that they are overturned 80 percent of the time. I think that circuit is  —   that circuit is in chaos and that circuit is frankly in turmoil. But we are appealing that, and we are going further. We’re issuing a new executive action next week that will comprehensively protect our country. So we’ll be going along the one path and hopefully winning that, at the same time we will be issuing a new and very comprehensive order to protect our people. That will be done sometime next week, toward the beginning or middle at the latest part. We have also taken steps to begin construction of the Keystone Pipeline and Dakota Access Pipelines. Thousands and thousands of jobs, and put new buy American measures in place to require American steel for American pipelines. In other words, they build a pipeline in this country, and we use the powers of government to make that pipeline happen, we want them to use American steel. And they are willing to do that, but nobody ever asked before I came along. Even this order was drawn and they didn’t say that. TRUMP: And I’m reading the order, I’m saying, why aren’t we using American steel? And they said, that’s a good idea, we put it in. To drain the swamp of corruption in Washington, D. C. I’ve started by imposing a   lobbying ban on White House officials and a lifetime ban on lobbying for a foreign government. We’ve begun preparing to repeal and replace Obamacare. Obamacare is a disaster, folks. It is’s disaster. I know you can say, oh, Obamacare. I mean, they fill up our alleys with people that you wonder how they get there, but they are not the Republican people our that representatives are representing. So we’ve begun preparing to repeal and replace Obamacare, and are deep in the midst of negotiations on a very historic tax reform to bring our jobs back, to bring our jobs back to this country. Big league. It’s already happening. But big league. I’ve also worked to install a cabinet over the delays and obstruction of Senate Democrats. You’ve seen what they’ve done over the last long number of years. That will be one of the great cabinets ever assembled in American history. You look at Rex Tillerson. He’s out there negotiating right now. General Mattis I mentioned before, General Kelly. We have great, great people. Mick is with us now. We have great people. Among their responsibilities will be ending the bleeding of jobs from our country and negotiating fair trade deals for our citizens. Now look, fair trade. Not free, fair. If a country is taking advantage of us, not going to let that happen anymore. Every country takes advantage of us almost. I may be able to find a couple that don’t. But for the most part, that would be a very tough job for me to do. Jobs have already started to surge. Since my election, Ford announced it will abandon its plans to build a new factory in Mexico, and will instead invest $700 million in Michigan, creating many, many jobs. Fiat Chrysler announced it will invest $1 billion in Ohio and Michigan, creating 2, 000 new American jobs. They were with me a week ago. You know you were here. General Motors likewise committed to invest billions of dollars in its American manufacturing operation, keeping many jobs here that were going to leave. And if I didn’t get elected, believe me, they would have left. And these jobs and these things that I’m announcing would never have come here. Intel just announced that it will move ahead with a new plant in Arizona that probably was never going to move ahead with. And that will result in at least 10, 000 American jobs. Walmart announced it will create 10, 000 jobs in the United States just this year because of our various plans and initiatives. There will be many, many more, many more, these are a few that we’re naming. Other countries have been taking advantage of us for decades  —   decades, and decades, and decades, folks. And we’re not going to let that happen anymore. Not going to let it happen. And one more thing, I have kept my promise to the American people by nominating a justice of the United States Supreme Court, Judge Neil Gorsuch, who is from my list of 20, and who will be a true defender of our laws and our Constitution, highly respected, should get the votes from the Democrats. You may not see that. But he’ll get there one way or the other. But he should get there the   way, and he should get those votes. This last month has represented an unprecedented degree of action on behalf of the great citizens of our country. Again, I say it. There has never been a presidency that’s done so much in such a short period of time. And we have not even started the big work yet. That starts early next week. Some very big things are going to be announced next week. So we are just getting started. We will be giving a speech, as I said, in Melbourne, Florida, at 5:00 p. m. I hope to see you there. And with that, I just say, God bless America, and let’s take some questions. Mara (ph) Mara (ph) go ahead. You were cut off pretty violently at our last news conference. QUESTION: ( ) TRUMP: Mike Flynn is a fine person, and I asked for his resignation. He respectfully gave it. He is a man who there was a certain amount of information given to Vice President Pence, who is with us today. And I was not happy with the way that information was given. He didn’t have to do that, because what he did wasn’t wrong  —   what he did in terms of the information he saw. What was wrong was the way that other people, including yourselves in this room, were given that information, because that was classified information that was given illegally. That’s the real problem. And, you know, you can talk all you want about Russia, which was all a, you know, fake news, fabricated deal, to try and make up for the loss of the Democrats and the press plays right into it. In fact, I saw a couple of the people that were supposedly involved with all of this  —   that they know nothing about it they weren’t in Russia they never made a phone call to Russia they never received a phone call. It’s all fake news. It’s all fake news. The nice thing is, I see it starting to turn, where people are now looking at the illegal  —   I think it’s very important  —   the illegal, giving out classified information. It was  —   and let me just tell you, it was given out like so much. I’ll give you an example. I called, as you know, Mexico. It was a very, very confidential, classified call. But I called Mexico. And in calling Mexico, I figured, oh, well that’s  —   I spoke to the president of Mexico I had a good call. All of a sudden, it’s out there for the world to see. It’s supposed to be secret. It’s supposed to be either confidential or classified, in that case. Same thing with Australia. All of a sudden, people are finding out exactly what took place. The same thing happened with respect to General Flynn. Everybody saw this. And I’m saying  —   the first thing I thought of when I heard about it is: How does the press get this information that’s classified? How do they do it? You know why? Because it’s an illegal process and the press should be ashamed of themselves. But more importantly, the people that gave out the information to the press should be ashamed of themselves, really ashamed. Yes, go ahead. QUESTION: ( ) TRUMP: Because when I looked at the information, I said, “I don’t think he did anything wrong if anything, he did something right. ” He was coming into office. He looked at the information. He said, “Huh, that’s fine. ” That’s what they’re supposed to do. They’re supposed to  —   he didn’t just call Russia. He called and spoke to both ways, I think there were    countries. He’s doing the job. You know, he was doing his job. The thing is, he didn’t tell our vice president properly, and then he said he didn’t remember. So either way, it wasn’t very satisfactory to me. And I have somebody that I think will be outstanding for the position. And that also helps, I think, in the making of my decision. But he didn’t tell the vice president of the United States the facts. And then he didn’t remember. And that just wasn’t acceptable to me. Yes? QUESTION: (inaudible) clarification here. During your campaign, did anyone from your team (inaudible) Russian government or Russian intelligence? And if so, what was the nature of those conversations (inaudible)? TRUMP: The failing New York Times wrote a big, long   story yesterday. And it was very much discredited, as you know. It was  —   it’s a joke. And the people mentioned in the story, I notice they were on television today saying they never even spoke to Russia. They weren’t even a part, really  —   I mean, they were such a minor part. They  —   I hadn’t spoken to them. I think the one person  —   I don’t think I’ve ever spoken to him. I don’t think I’ve ever met him. And he actually said he was a very   member of I think a committee for a short period of time. I don’t think I ever met him. Now, it’s possible that I walked into a room and he was sitting there, but I don’t think I ever met him. I didn’t talk to him ever. And he thought it was a joke. The other person said he never spoke to Russia never received a call. Look at his phone records, et cetera, et cetera. And the other person, people knew that he represented various countries, but I don’t think he represented Russia, but knew that he represented various countries. That’s what he does. I mean, people know that. That’s Mr. Manafort, who’s  —   by the way, who’s by the way a respected man. He’s a respected man. But I think he represented the Ukraine or Ukraine government or somebody, but everybody  —   people knew that. Everybody knew that. So, these people  —   and he said that he has absolutely nothing to do and never has with Russia. And he said that very forcefully. I saw his statement. He said it very forcefully. Most of the papers don’t print it because that’s not good for their stories. TRUMP: So the three people that they talked about all totally deny it. And I can tell you, speaking for myself, I own nothing in Russia. I have no loans in Russia. I don’t have any deals in Russia. President Putin called me up very nicely to congratulate me on the win of the election. He then, called me up extremely nicely to congratulate me on the inauguration, which was terrific. But so did many other leaders, almost all other leaders from almost all of the country. So that’s the extent. Russia is fake news. Russia  —   this is fake news put out by the media. The real news is the fact that people, probably from the Obama administration because they’re there, because we have our new people going in place, right now. As you know, Mike Pompeo has  —   has now taken control of the CIA, James Comey at FBI, Dan Coats is waiting to be approved, I mean he is a senator and a highly respected one and he’s still waiting to be approved. But our new people are going in. And just while you’re at it, because you mentioned this, Wall Street Journal did a story today that was almost as disgraceful as the failing New York Time’s story, yesterday. And it talked about  —   these are (ph) front page. So director of national intelligence just put out, acting a statement, any suggestion that the United States intelligence community, this was just given to us, is withholding information and not providing the best possible intelligence to the president and his national security team is not true. So they took this front page story out of The Wall Street Journal top and they just wrote the story that its not true. And I’ll tell you something, I’ll be honest, because I sort of enjoy this back and forth that I guess I have all my life but I’ve never seen more dishonest media than frankly, the political media. I thought the financial media was much better, much more honest. But I will say that, I never get phone calls from the media. How did they write a story like that in The Wall Street Journal without asking me or how did they write a story in The New York Times, put it on front page? That was like the story they wrote about the women and me, front page, big massive story. And it was nasty and then they called, they said we never said that, we like Mr. Trump. They called up my office, we like Mr. Trump, we never said that. And it was totally  —   they totally misrepresented those very wonderful women, I have to tell you, totally misrepresented. I said give us the retraction. They never gave us a retraction and frankly, I then went on to other things. OK, go ahead. QUESTION: ( ) said today that you have big intellectual margins (inaudible) 300 or more (ph) or 350 (ph) electoral (ph) votes. President Obama about 365 ( ). (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: Yeah. QUESTION: Obama ( ) 426 on ( ). So why should Americans. .. (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: . ..I’m skipping that information, I don’t know, I was just given (ph) we had a very, very big margin. QUESTION: ( ) why should Americans trust you ( ) the information ( )? TRUMP: Well, I don’t know, I was given that information. I was given  —   I actually, I’ve seen that information around. But it was a very substantial victory, do you agree with that? OK thank you, that’s. .. (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: Go ahead Sir, yes? QUESTION: Can you tell us in determining that Lieutenant General Flynn did  —   whether there was no wrongdoing in your mind, what evidence was weighed? Did you ask for transcripts of these telephone intercepts with Russian officials, particularly the Ambassador Sergey Kislyak, who he was communicating with? What —   what evidence did you weigh to determine that there was no wrongdoing? Further to that, Sir, you said on a couple of locations this morning, you are going to aggressively pursue the source of these leaks. TRUMP: We are. QUESTION: Can we ask what you’re going to do and also, we’ve heard about a  —   a review of the intelligence community headed up by Steven Feinberg, what can you tell us about that? TRUMP: Well, first of all about that, we now have Dan Coats, hopefully soon, Mike Pompeo and James Comey and they’re in position so I hope that we’ll be able to straighten that out without using anybody else. The gentleman you mentioned is a very talented man, very successful man and he’s offered his services and you know, it’s something we may take advantage of. But I don’t think we’re need that at all because of the fact that you know, I think that we are gonna be able to straighten it out very easily on its own. As far as the general’s concerned, when I first heard about it, I said huh, that doesn’t sound wrong. My counsel came, Don McGahn, White House Counsel, and he told me and I asked him, he can speak very well for himself. He said he doesn’t think anything is wrong, you know, really didn’t think. It was really, what happened after that but he didn’t think anything was done wrong. I didn’t either because I waited a period of time and I started to think about it, I said “well I don’t see”  —   to me, he was doing the job. The information was provided by  —   who I don’t know, Sally Yates. And I was a little surprised because I said “doesn’t sound like he did anything wrong there. ” But he did something wrong with respect to the vice president and I thought that was not acceptable. As far as  —   as far as the actual making the call, fact I’ve watched various programs and I’ve read various articles where he was just doing his job. That was very normal. You know, first everybody got excited because they thought he did something wrong. After they thought about it, it turned out he was just doing his job. So  —   and I do. And by the way, with all of that being said, I do think he’s a fine man. QUESTION: Sir, if I could, on the leaks  —   on the leaks, sir. .. TRUMP: . ..Go ahead. Finish off then I’ll get you. QUESTION: I’m sorry. What will you do on the leaks? You’ve said twice today. .. TRUMP: . ..Yes, we’re looking at them very  —   very, very serious. I’ve gone to all of the folks in charge of the various agencies and we’re  —   I’ve actually called the Justice Department to look into the leaks. Those are criminal leaks. They’re put out by people either in agencies  —   I think you’ll see it stopping because now we have our people in. You know, again, we don’t have our people in because we can’t get them approved by the Senate. We just had Jeff Sessions approved. Injustice, as an example (ph). So, we are looking into that very seriously. It’s a criminal act. You know what I say, when I  —   when I was called out on Mexico, I was shocked because all this equipment, all this incredible phone equipment  —   when I was called out on Mexico, I was  —   honestly, I was really, really surprised. But I said “you know, it doesn’t make sense. That won’t happen” but that wasn’t that important a call, it was fine, I could show it to the world and he could show it to the world, the president who’s a very fine man, by the way. Same thing with Australia. I said “that’s terrible that it was leaked” but it wasn’t that important. But then I said to myself “what happens when I’m dealing with the problem of North Korea?” What happens when I’m dealing with the problems in the Middle East? Are you folks going to be reporting all of that very, very confidential information, very important, very  —   you know, I mean at the highest level? Are you going to be reporting about that too? So, I don’t want classified information getting out to the public and in a way that was almost a test. So I’m dealing with Mexico, I’m dealing with Argentina, we were dealing on this case with Mike Flynn. All this information gets put into the “Washington Post” and gets put into the “New York Times” and I’m saying “what’s going to happen when I’m dealing on the Middle East? What’s going to happen when I’m dealing with really, really important subjects like North Korea? We got to stop it. That’s why it’s a criminal penalty. QUESTION: I just want to get you to clarify this very important point. Can you say definitively that nobody on your campaign had any contacts with the Russians during the campaign? And on the leaks, is it fake news or are these real leaks? TRUMP: Well the leaks are real. You’re the one that wrote about them and reported them, I mean the leaks are real. You know what they said, you saw it and the leaks are absolutely real. The news is fake because so much of the news is fake. So one thing that I felt it was very important to do  —   and I hope we can correct it. Because there’s nobody I have more respect for  —   well, maybe a little bit but the reporters, good reporters. It’s very important to me and especially in this position. It’s very important. I don’t mind bad stories. I can handle a bad story better than anybody as long as it’s true and, you know, over a course of time, I’ll make mistakes and you’ll write badly and I’m OK with that. But I’m not OK when it is fake. I mean, I watch CNN, it’s so much anger and hatred and just the hatred. I don’t watch it any more because it’s very good  —   he’s saying no. It’s OK, Jim (ph). It’s OK, Jim (ph) you’ll have your chance. But I watch others too. You’re not the only one so don’t feel badly. But I think it should be straight. I think it should be  —   I think it would be frankly more interesting. I know how good everybody’s ratings are right now but I think that actually  —   I think that’d actually be better. People  —   I mean, you have a lower approval rate than Congress. I think that’s right. I don’t know, Peter (ph) is that one right? Because you know I think they have lower  —   I heard lower than Congress. But honestly, the public would appreciate it, I’d appreciate it  —   again, I don’t mind bad stories when it’s true but we have an administration where the Democrats are making it very difficult. TRUMP: I think we’re setting a record or close to a record in the time of approval of a cabinet. I mean, the numbers are crazy. When I’m looking, some of them had them approved immediately. I’m going forever and I still have a lot of people that we’re waiting for. And that’s all they’re doing, is delaying. And you look at Schumer and the mess that he’s got over there and they have nothing going. The only thing they can do is delay. And, you know, I think that they’d be better served by, you know, approving and making sure that they’re happy and everybody’s good. And sometimes  —   I mean, I know President Obama lost three or four, and you lose them on the way, and that’s OK. That’s fine. But I think it would  —   I think they would be much better served, John, if they just went through the process quickly. This is pure delay tactics. And they say it, and everybody understands it. Yeah, go ahead, Jimmy. QUESTION: ( ) TRUMP: Well, I had nothing to do with it. I have nothing to do with Russia. I told you, I have no deals there, I have no anything. Now, when WikiLeaks, which I had nothing to do with, comes out and happens to give, they’re not giving classified information. They’re giving stuff  —   what was said at an office about Hillary cheating on the debates. Which, by the way, nobody mentions. Nobody mentions that Hillary received the questions to the debates. Can you imagine  —   seriously  —   can you imagine if I received the questions? It would be the electric chair. OK, he should be put in the electric  —   you would even call for the reinstitution of the death penalty, OK. Maybe not you John. Yes? We’ll do you next Jim, I do you next( ph). QUESTION: ( ) clarify  —   TRUMP: Yes, yes, sure QUESTION: Did you direct Mike Flynn to discuss sanctions with the Russian ambassador  —   TRUMP: No, I didn’t. QUESTION:  —   prior to your  —   TRUMP: No, I didn’t. QUESTION:  —   inauguration. TRUMP: No, I didn’t. QUESTION: And then fired him  —   TRUMP: Excuse me. QUESTION: ( ) TRUMP: No, I fired him because of what he said to Mike Pence. Very simple. Mike was doing his job. He was calling countries and his counterparts. So, it certainly would have been OK with me if he did it. I would have directed him to do it if I thought he wasn’t doing it. I didn’t direct him, but I would have directed him because that’s his job. And it came out that way  —   and in all fairness, I watched Dr. Charles Krauthammer the other night say he was doing his job and I agreed with him. And since then, I’ve watched many other people say that. No, I didn’t direct him, but I would have directed him if he didn’t do it. OK? Jim? QUESTION: Thank you very much, and just for the record, we don’t hate you. I don’t hate you. TRUMP: OK. QUESTION: So, pass that along  —   TRUMP: Ask  —   ask Jeff Zucker how he got his job. OK? QUESTION: If I may follow up on some of the questions that have taken place so far here, sir  —   TRUMP: Well, that’s  —   well, you know, we do have other people. You do have other people and your ratings aren’t as good as some of the other people that are waiting. QUESTION: It’s pretty good right now, actually. TRUMP: OK, go ahead, John. QUESTION: If I may ask, sir, you said earlier that WikiLeaks was revealing information about the Hillary Clinton campaign during the election cycle. You welcomed that. At one time  —   TRUMP: I was OK with it. QUESTION:  —   you said  —   you said that you loved WikiLeaks. At another campaign press conference you called on the Russians to find the missing 30, 000  . I’m wondering, sir, if you  —   TRUMP: Well, she was actually missing 33 and then that got extended with a pile after that. QUESTION: Then( ph) your( ph) numbers( ph) were off too. TRUMP: No  —   no, but I did say 30. But it was actually higher than that. QUESTION: If  —   if I may ask you, sir, it  —   it sounds as though you do not have much credibility here when it comes to leaking if that is something that you encouraged during( ph) the campaign  —   TRUMP: OK, fair question. Ready? QUESTION: Well, if I may ask you that  —   TRUMP: No  —   no, but let me do one at a time. QUESTION: If I may as a follow up? TRUMP: Do you mind? QUESTION: Yes, sir. TRUMP: All right. So, in one case, you’re talking about highly classified information. In the other case, you’re talking about John Podesta saying bad things about the boss. I will say this, if John Podesta said that about me and he was working for me, I would have fired him so fast your head would have spun. He said terrible things about her. But it wasn’t classified information. But in one case, you’re talking about classified  —   regardless, if you look at the RNC, we had a very strong  —   at my suggestion  —   and I give Reince great credit for this  —   at my suggestion, because I know something about this world, I said I want a very strong defensive mechanism. I don’t want to be hacked. And we did that. And you have seen that they tried to hack us and they failed. The DNC did not do that. And if they did it, they could not have been hacked. But they were hacked and terrible things came in. And, you know, the only thing that I do think is unfair is some of the things were so  —   they were  —   when I heard some of those things I picked up the papers the next morning and said, oh, this is going to be front page, it wasn’t even in the papers. Again, if I had that happen to me, it would be the biggest story in the history of publishing or the head of newspapers. I would have been headline in every newspaper. I mean, think of it. They gave her the questions to a debate and she  —   and she should have reported herself. Why did Hillary Clinton announce that, “I’m sorry, but I have been given the questions to a debate or a town hall, and I feel that it’s inappropriate, and I want to turn in CNN for not doing a good job. ” QUESTION: And if I may follow up on that, just something that Jonathan Karl (ph) was asking you about. You said that the leaks are real, but the news is fake. I guess I don’t understand. It seems that there’s a disconnect there. If the information coming from those leaks is real, then how can the stories be fake? TRUMP: The reporting is fake. Look, look. .. (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: You know what it is? Here’s the thing. The public isn’t  —   you know, they read newspapers, they see television, they watch. They don’t know if it’s true or false because they’re not involved. I’m involved. I’ve been involved with this stuff all my life. But I’m involved. So I know when you’re telling the truth or when you’re not. I just see many, many untruthful things. And I’ll tell you what else I see. I see tone. You know the word “tone. ” The tone is such hatred. I’m really not a bad person, by the way. No, but the tone is such  —   I do get good ratings, you have to admit that  —   the tone is such hatred. I watched this morning a couple of the networks. And I have to say, Fox  Friends in the morning, they’re very honorable people. They’re very  —   not because they’re good, because they hit me also when I do something wrong. But they have the most honest morning show. That’s all I can say. It’s the most honest. But the tone, Jim. If you look  —   the hatred. The, I mean, sometimes  —   sometimes somebody gets. .. (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: Well, you look at your show that goes on at 10 o’clock in the evening. You just take a look at that show. That is a constant hit. The panel is almost always exclusive  . The good news is he doesn’t have good ratings. But the panel is almost exclusive  . And the hatred and venom coming from his mouth the hatred coming from other people on your network. Now, I will say this. I watch it. I see it. I’m amazed by it. And I just think you’d be a lot better off, I honestly do. The public gets it, you know. Look, when I go to rallies, they turn around, they start screaming at CNN. They want to throw their placards at CNN. You know. I  —   I think you would do much better by being different. But you just take a look. Take a look at some of your shows in the morning and the evening. If a guest comes out and says something positive about me, it’s  —   it’s brutal. Now, they’ll take this news conference  —   I’m actually having a very good time, OK? But they’ll take this news conference  —   don’t forget, that’s the way I won. Remember, I used to give you a news conference every time I made a speech, which was like every day. OK? (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: No, that’s how I won. I won with news conferences and probably speeches. I certainly didn’t win by people listening to you people. That’s for sure. But I’m having a good time. Tomorrow, they will say, “Donald Trump rants and raves at the press. ” I’m not ranting and raving. I’m just telling you. You know, you’re dishonest people. But  —   but I’m not ranting and raving. I love this. I’m having a good time doing it. But tomorrow, the headlines are going to be, “Donald Trump rants and raves. ” I’m not ranting and raving. Go ahead. QUESTION: If I may, just one more followup. .. TRUMP: Should I let him have a little bit more? What do you think, Peter? Peter, should I have  —   let him have a little bit more? Sit down. Sit down. We’ll. .. (CROSSTALK) QUESTION: Just because of the attack of fake news and attacking our network, I just want to ask you, sir. .. TRUMP: I’m changing it from fake news, though. QUESTION: Doesn’t that under. .. TRUMP: Very fake news. QUESTION: . .. I know, but aren’t you. .. (LAUGHTER) TRUMP: Go ahead. QUESTION: Real news, Mr. President, real news. TRUMP: And you’re not related to our new. .. QUESTION: I am not related, sir. No. I do like the sound of Secretary Acosta, I must say. TRUMP: I looked  —   you know, I looked at that name. I said, wait a minute, is there any relation there? Alex Acosta. QUESTION: I’m sure you checked that out, sir. TRUMP: OK. Now I checked it  —   I said  —   they said, “No, sir. ” I said, “Do me a favor, go back and check the family tree. ” QUESTION: But aren’t you  —   aren’t you concerned, sir, that you are undermining the people’s faith in the First Amendment, freedom of the press, the press in this country, when you call stories you don’t like “fake news”? Why not just say it’s a story I don’t like. TRUMP: I do that. QUESTION: When you call it “fake news,” you’re undermining confidence in our news media (inaudible) important. TRUMP: No, no. I do that. Here’s the thing. OK. I understand what you’re  —   and you’re right about that, except this. See, I know when I should get good and when I should get bad. And sometimes I’ll say, “Wow, that’s going to be a great story. ” And I’ll get killed. I know what’s good and bad. I’d be a pretty good reporter, not as good as you. But I know what’s good. I know what’s bad. And when they change it and make it really bad, something that should be positive  —   sometimes something that should be very positive, they’ll make OK. They’ll even make it negative. So I understand it. So, because I’m there. I know what was said. I know who’s saying it. I’m there. So it’s very important to me. Look, I want to see an honest press. When I started off today by saying that it’s so important to the public to get an honest press. The press  —   the public doesn’t believe you people anymore. Now, maybe I had something to do with that. I don’t know. But they don’t believe you. If you were straight and really told it like it is, as Howard Cosell used to say, right? Of course, he had some questions also. But if you were straight, I would be your biggest booster. I would be your biggest fan in the world, including bad stories about me. But if you go  —   as an example, you’re CNN, I mean it’s story after story after story is bad. I won. I won. And the other thing, chaos because zero chaos. We are running  —   this is a   machine and Reince happens to be doing a good job but half of his job is putting out lies by the press (ph). You know, I said to him yesterday this whole Russia scam that you guys are building so that you don’t talk about the real subject which is illegal leaks, but I watched him yesterday working so hard to try and get that story proper. And I’m saying “here’s my chief of staff,” a really good guy, did a phenomenal job at RNC. I mean, he won the election, right? We won the presidency. We got some senators, we got some  —   all over the country, you take a look, he’s done a great job. And I said to myself, you know  —   and I said to somebody that was in the room, I said “you take a look at Reince, he’s working so hard just putting out fires that are fake fires. ” I mean, they’re fake. They’re not true. And isn’t that a shame because he’d rather be working on healthcare, he’d rather be working on tax reform, Jim (ph). I mean that. I would be your biggest fan in the world if you treated me right. I sort of understand there’s a certain bias maybe by Jeff (ph) or somebody, you know  —   you know, whatever reason. But  —   and I understand that. But you’ve got to be at least a little bit fair and that’s why the public sees it. They see it. They see it’s not fair. You take a look at some of your shows and you see the bias and the hatred. And the public is smart, they understand it. Go ahead. QUESTION: (inaudible) . ..for those who believe that there is something to it, is there anything that you have learned over the last few weeks that you might be able to reveal that might ease their concerns that this isn’t fake news? And second. .. TRUMP: . ..I think they don’t believe it. I don’t think the public  —   that’s why the Rasmussen poll just has me through the roof. I don’t think they believe it. Well, I guess one of the reasons I’m here today is to tell you the whole Russian thing, that’s a ruse. That’s a ruse. And by the way, it would be great if we could get along with Russia, just so you understand that. Now tomorrow, you’ll say “Donald Trump wants to get along with Russia, this is terrible. ” It’s not terrible. It’s good. We had Hillary Clinton try and do a reset. We had Hillary Clinton give Russia 20 percent of the uranium in our country. You know what uranium is, right? This thing called nuclear weapons like lots of things are done with uranium including some bad things. Nobody talks about that. I didn’t do anything for Russia. I’ve done nothing for Russia. Hillary Clinton gave them 20 percent of our uranium. Hillary Clinton did a reset, remember? With the stupid plastic button that made us all look like a bunch of jerks. Here, take a look. He looked at her like, what the hell is she doing with that cheap plastic button? Hillary Clinton  —   that was the reset, remember it said reset? Now if I do that, oh, I’m a bad guy. If we could get along with Russia, that’s a positive thing. We have a very talented man, Rex Tillerson, who’s going to be meeting with them shortly and I told him. I said “I know politically it’s probably not good for me. ” The greatest thing I could do is shoot that ship that’s 30 miles off shore right out of the water. Everyone in this country’s going to say “oh, it’s so great. ” That’s not great. That’s not great. I would love to be able to get along with Russia. Now, you’ve had a lot of presidents that haven’t taken that tack. Look where we are now. Look where we are now. So, if I can  —   now, I love to negotiate things, I do it really well, and all that stuff. But  —   but it’s possible I won’t be able to get along with Putin. Maybe it is. But I want to just tell you, the false reporting by the media, by you people, the false, horrible, fake reporting makes it much harder to make a deal with Russia. And probably Putin said “you know. ” He’s sitting behind his desk and he’s saying “you know, I see what’s going on in the United States, I follow it closely. It’s going to be impossible for President Trump to ever get along with Russia because of all the pressure he’s got with this fake story. ” OK? And that’s a shame because if we could get along with Russia  —   and by the way, China and Japan and everyone. If we could get along, it would be a positive thing, not a negative thing. QUESTION: Is tax reform on the line (ph)? QUESTION: Mr. President? Mr. President? Mr. President, since you. .. TRUMP: Tax reform is going to happen fairly quickly. We’re doing Obamacare. We’re in final stages. We should be submitting the initial plan in March, early March, I would say. And we have to, as you know, statutorily and for reasons of budget, we have to go first. It’s not like, frankly, the tax would be easier, in my opinion, but for statutory reasons and for budgetary reasons, we have to submit the healthcare sooner. So we’ll be submitting healthcare sometime in early March,   March. And after that, we’re going to come up, and we’re doing very well on tax reform. Yes? QUESTION: Mr. President, you mentioned Russia. Let’s talk about some serious issues that have come up in the last week that you have had to deal with as president of the United States. TRUMP: OK. QUESTION: You mentioned the vessel  —   the spy vessel off the coast of the United States. TRUMP: Not good. QUESTION: There was a ballistic missile test that many interpret as a violation of an agreement between the two countries and a Russian plane buzzed a U. S. destroyer. TRUMP: Not good. QUESTION: I listened to you during the campaign . .. TRUMP: Excuse me, excuse me. When did it happen? It happened when, if you were Putin right now, you would say, “Hey, we’re back to the old games with the United States there’s no way Trump can ever do a deal with us. ” Because the  —   you have to understand. If I was just brutal on Russia right now, just brutal, people would say, you would say, “Oh, isn’t that wonderful. ” But I know you well enough. Then you would say, “Oh, he was too tough he shouldn’t have done that. ” Look, all of the. .. (CROSSTALK) QUESTION: I’m just trying to find out your orientation to those. .. (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: Wait a minute. Wait, wait. Excuse me just one second. (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: All of those things that you mentioned are very recent, because probably Putin assumes that he’s not going to be able to make a deal with me because it’s politically not popular for me to make a deal. So Hillary Clinton tries a reset. It failed. They all tried. But I’m different than those people. Go ahead. QUESTION: How are you interpreting those moves? And what do you intend to do about them? Have you given Rex Tillerson any advice or counsel on how to deal? TRUMP: I have. I have. And I’m so beautifully represented. I’m so honored that the Senate approved him. He’s going to be fantastic. Yes, I think that I’ve already. .. QUESTION: Is Putin testing you, do you believe, sir? TRUMP: No, I don’t think so. I think Putin probably assumes that he can’t make a deal with me anymore because politically it would be unpopular for a politician to make a deal. I can’t believe I’m saying I’m a politician, but I guess that’s what I am now. Because, look, it would be much easier for me to be tough on Russia, but then we’re not going to make a deal. Now, I don’t know that we’re going to make a deal. I don’t know. We might. We might not. But it would be much easier for me to be so tough  —   the tougher I am on Russia, the better. But you know what? I want to do the right thing for the American people. And to be honest, secondarily, I want to do the right thing for the world. If Russia and the United States actually got together and got along  —   and don’t forget, we’re a very powerful nuclear country and so are they. There’s no upside. We’re a very powerful nuclear country and so are they. I have been briefed. And I can tell you one thing about a briefing that we’re allowed to say because anybody that ever read the most basic book can say it, nuclear holocaust would be like no other. They’re a very powerful nuclear country and so are we. If we have a good relationship with Russia, believe me, that’s a good thing, not a bad thing. QUESTION: So when you say they’re not good, do you mean that they are. .. TRUMP: Who did I say is not good? QUESTION: No, I read off the three things that have recently happened. Each one of them you said they’re not good. (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: No, it’s not good, but they happened. QUESTION: But do they damage the relationship? Do they undermine. .. TRUMP: They all happened recently. No. .. (CROSSTALK) QUESTION: . .. this country’s ability to work with Russia? TRUMP: They all happened recently. And I understand what they’re doing because they’re doing the same thing. Now, again, maybe I’m not going to be able to do a deal with Russia, but at least I will have tried. And if I don’t, does anybody really think that Hillary Clinton would be tougher on Russia than Donald Trump? Does anybody in this room really believe that? OK? But I tell you one thing, she tried to make a deal. She had the reset. She gave all that valuable uranium away. She did other things. You know, they say I’m close to Russia. Hillary Clinton gave away 20 percent of the uranium in the United States. She’s close to Russia. QUESTION: Can we. .. TRUMP: I gave  —   you know what I gave to Russia? You know what I gave? Nothing. QUESTION: Can we conclude there will be no response to these particular provocations? TRUMP: I’m not going to tell you anything about what response I do. I don’t talk about military response. I don’t say I’m going into Mosul in four months. “We are going to attack Mosul in four months. ” Then three months later, “We are going to attack Mosul in one month. ” “Next week, we are going to attack Mosul. ” In the meantime, Mosul is very, very difficult. Do you know why? Because I don’t talk about military, and I don’t talk about certain other things, you’re going to be surprised to hear that. And by the way, my whole campaign, I’d say that. So I don’t have to tell you. I don’t want to be one of these guys that say, “Yes, here’s what we’re going to do. ” I don’t have to do that. I don’t have to tell you what I’m going to do in North Korea. (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: Wait a minute. I don’t have to tell you what I’m going to do in North Korea. And I don’t have to tell you what I’m going to do with Iran. You know why? Because they shouldn’t know. And eventually, you guys are going to get tired of asking that question. TRUMP: So when you ask me what am I going to do with a ship, the Russian ship as an example, I’m not going to tell you. But hopefully, I won’t have to do anything, but I’m not going to tell you. OK. QUESTION: Could I just ask you  —   thank you very much, Mr. President. The trouble. .. TRUMP: Where are you from? QUESTION: BBC. TRUMP: Here’s another beauty. QUESTION: That’s a good line. Impartial, free and fair. TRUMP: Yeah. Sure. QUESTION: Mr. President. .. TRUMP: Just like CNN right? QUESTION: On the travel ban  —   we could banter back and forth. On the travel ban would you accept that that was a good example of the smooth running of government. .. TRUMP: Yeah, I do. I do. Let me tell you about this government. .. QUESTION: Were there any mistakes. .. TRUMP: Wait. Wait. I know who you are. Just wait. Let me tell you about the travel ban. We had a very smooth rollout of the travel ban. But we had a bad court. Got a bad decision. We had a court that’s been overturned. Again, may be wrong. But I think it’s 80 percent of the time, a lot. We had a bad decision. We’re going to keep going with that decision. We’re going to put in a new executive order next week some time. But we had a bad decision. That’s the other thing that was wrong with the travel ban. You had Delta with a massive problem with their computer system at the airports. You had some people that were put out there, brought by very nice busses, and they were put out at various locations. Despite that the only problem that we had is we had a bad court. We had a court that gave us what I consider to be, with great respect, a very bad decision. Very bad for the safety and security of our country. The rollout was perfect. Now, what I wanted to do was do the exact same executive order, but said one thing. I said this to my people. Give them a   period of time. But Gen. Kelly, now Sec. Kelly, said if you do that, all these people will come in and (inaudible) the bad ones. You do agree there are bad people out there, right? That not everybody that’s like you. You have some bad people out there. Kelly said you can’t do that. And he was right. As soon as he said it I said wow, never thought of it. I said how about one week? He said no good. You got to do it immediately because if you do it immediately they don’t have time to come in. Now nobody ever reports that. But that’s why we did it quickly. Now, if I would’ve done it a month, everything would’ve been perfect. The problem is we would’ve wasted a lot of time, and maybe a lot of lives because a lot of bad people would’ve come into our country. Now in the meantime, we’re vetting very, very strongly. Very, very strongly. But we need help. And we need help by getting that executive order passed. QUESTION: Just a brief  . But if it’s so urgent, why not introduce. .. TRUMP: Yes? Go ahead. QUESTION: Thank you. I was just hoping that we could get a yes or no answer on one of these questions involving Russia. Can you say whether you are aware that anyone who advised your campaign had contacts with Russia during the course of the election? TRUMP: Well I told you, Gen. Flynn obviously was dealing. So that’s one person. But he was dealing, as he should have been. QUESTION: During the election? TRUMP: No. Nobody that I know of. Nobody. .. QUESTION: So you’re not aware of any contact during the course.. TRUMP: Look, look, look. .. QUESTION: . .. of the election? TRUMP: How many times do I have to answer this question? QUESTION: Can you just say yes or no? TRUMP: Russia is a ruse. I know you have to get up and ask a question. It’s so important. Russia is a ruse. I have nothing to do with Russia. Haven’t made a phone call to Russia in years. Don’t speak to people from Russia. Not that I wouldn’t. I just have nobody to speak to. I spoke to Putin twice. He called me on the election. I told you this. And he called me on the inauguration, a few days ago. We had a very good talk, especially the second one, lasted for a pretty long period of time. I’m sure you probably get it because it was classified. So I’m sure everybody in this room perhaps has it. But we had a very, very good talk. I have nothing to do with Russia. To the best of my knowledge no person that I deal with does. Now, Manafort has totally denied it. He denied it. Now people knew that he was a consultant over in that part of the world for a while, but not for Russia. I think he represented Ukraine or people having to do with Ukraine, or people that  —   whoever. But people knew that. Everybody knew that. QUESTION: But in his capacity as your campaign manager, was he in touch with Russian officials during the election? TRUMP: You know what? He said no. I could only tell you what he  —   now he was replaced long before the election. You know that, right? He was replaced long before the election. When all of this stuff started coming out, it came out during the election. But Paul Manafort, who’s a good man also by the way, Paul Manfort was replaced long before the election took place. He was only there for a short period of time. QUESTION: Mr. President. .. TRUMP: How much longer should we stay here, folks? QUESTION: Mr. President. .. TRUMP: Five more minutes. Is that OK? Five? QUESTION: Mr. President, on national. .. TRUMP: Wait. Let’s see. Who’s  —   I want to find a friendly reporter. QUESTION: Mr. ... TRUMP: Are you a friendly reporter? Watch how friendly he is. Wait. Wait. Watch how friendly he is. Go ahead. QUESTION: ( ). .. TRUMP: Go ahead. QUESTION: So first of all, my name is (Inaudible) from (Inaudible) Magazine. I (inaudible). I haven’t seen anybody in my community, including yourself or any of the  —   anyone on your staff of being ( ). Because ( ). However, what we’ve already heard about and what we ( ) is ( ) so you’re general forecast (ph) like 48 ( ). There are people who are everything (ph) happens through their packs (ph) is one of the ( ). .. (CROSSTALK) TRUMP:. ..he said he was gonna ask a very simple, easy question. And it’s not, its not, not  —   not a simple question, not a fair question. OK sit down, I understand the rest of your question. So here’s the story, folks. Number one, I am the least   Semitic person that you’ve ever seen in your entire life. Number two, racism, the least racist person. In fact, we did very well relative to other people running as a Republican  —   quiet, quiet, quiet. See, he lied about  —   he was gonna get up and ask a very straight, simple question, so you know, welcome to the world of the media. But let me just tell you something, that I hate the charge, I find it repulsive. I hate even the question because people that know me and you heard the prime minister, you heard Ben Netanyahu (ph) yesterday, did you hear him, Bibi? He said, I’ve known Donald Trump for a long time and then he said, forget it. So you should take that instead of having to get up and ask a very insulting question like that. (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: Yeah, go ahead. Go ahead. QUESTION: Thank you, I’m Lisa (ph) from the. .. (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: See, it just shows you about the press, but that’s the way the press is. QUESTION: Thank you, Mr. President. Lisa Dejardown (ph) from the PBS News Hour. On national security and immigration, can you give us more details on the executive order you plan for next week? Even its broad outlines? TRUMP: Yeah. QUESTION: Will it be focused on specific. .. TRUMP: It’s a very fair question. QUESTION: . ..countries? And in addition, on the DACA program for immigration. TRUMP: Right. QUESTION: What is your plan, do you plan to continue that program or to end it? TRUMP: We’re gonna show great heart, DACA is a very, very difficult subject for me, I will tell you. To me, it’s one of the most difficult subjects I have because you have these incredible kids. In many cases, not in all cases. And some of the cases, having DACA and they’re gang members and they’re drug dealers, too. But you have some absolutely, incredible kids, I would say mostly. They were brought here in such a way  —   it’s a very  —   it’s a very, very tough subject. We’re gonna deal with DACA with heart. I have to deal with a lot of politicians, don’t forget and I have to convince them that what I’m saying is  —   is right. And I appreciate your understanding on that. But the DACA situation is a very, very  —   it’s a very difficult thing for me because you know, I love these kids, I love kids, I have kids and grandkids. And I find it very, very hard doing what the law says exactly to do and you know, the law is rough. I’m not talking about new laws, I’m talking the existing law, is very rough, it’s very, very rough. As far as the new order, the new order is going to be very much tailored to the what I consider to be a very bad decision. But we can tailor the order to that decision and get just about everything, in some ways, more. But we’re tailoring it now to the decision, we have some of the best lawyers in the country working on it. And the new executive order, is being tailored to the decision we got down from the court. OK? QUESTION: Mr. President. .. (CROSSTALK) QUESTION: . ..reopening of the White House Visitors Office? TRUMP: Yes. QUESTION: And she does a lot of great work for the country as well (ph). Can you talk a little bit about what’s first for (ph) Melania Trump does for the country and (inaudible) so opening White House Visitors Office, what does that mean. .. TRUMP: Now, that’s what I call a nice question. That is very  —   who are you with? QUESTION: ( ) TRUMP: Good, I’m gonna start watching, all right? Thank you very much. Melania’s terrific, she was here last night, we had dinner with Senator Rubio and his wife who is by the way, lovely. And we had a really good discussion about Cuba because we have very similar views on Cuba. And Cuba was very good to me in the Florida election, as you know the Cuban Americans. And I think that Melania’s gonna be outstanding, that’s right, she just opened up the visitors center, in other words, touring of the White House. She, like others that she’s working with, feel very, very strongly about women’s issue, women’s difficulties. Very, very strongly, she’s a very, very strong advocate. I think she’s a great representative for this country. And a funny thing happens, because she gets  —   she gets so unfairly  —   Melania, the things they say. I’ve known her for a long time, she was a very successful person, she was a very successful model. She did really well. She would go home at night and didn’t even want to go out with people. She was a very private person. She was always the highest quality that you’ll ever find. And the things they say  —   I’ve known her for a long time  —   the things they say are so unfair. And actually, she’s been apologized to, as you know, by various media because they said things that were lies. I’ll just tell you this. I think she’s going to be a fantastic first lady. She’s going to be a tremendous representative of women and of the people. And helping her and working her will be Ivanka, who is a fabulous person and a fabulous, fabulous woman. And they’re not doing this for money. They’re not doing this for pay, they’re doing this because they feel it both of them. And Melania goes back and forth and after Barron finishes school  —   because it’s hard to take a child out of school with a few months left  —   she and Barron will be moving over to the White House. OK, thank you, that’s a very nice question. (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: Go ahead. QUESTION: Mr. Trump? TRUMP: Yes, oh, this is going to be a bad question, but that’s OK. QUESTION: It doesn’t( ph) have( ph) to be a bad question. TRUMP: Good, because I enjoy watching you on television. Go ahead. QUESTION: Well, thank you so much. Mr. President, I need to find out from you, you said something as it relates to inner cities. That was one of your platforms during your campaign. Now you’re  —   TRUMP: Fix the inner cities. QUESTION:  —   president. Fixing the inner cities. TRUMP: Yep. QUESTION: What will be that fix and your urban agenda as well as your HBCU Executive Order that’s coming out this afternoon? See, it wasn’t bad, was it? TRUMP: That was very professional and very good. QUESTION: I’m very professional. TRUMP: We’ll be announcing the order in a little while and I’d rather let the order speak for itself. But it could be something that I think that will be very good for everybody concerned. But we’ll talk to you about that after we do the announcement. As far as the inner cities, as you know, I was very strong on the inner cities during the campaign. I think it’s probably what got me a much higher percentage of the African American vote than a lot of people thought I was going to get. We did, you know, much higher than people thought I was going to get. And I was honored by that, including the Hispanic vote, which was also much higher. And by the way, if I might add, including the women’s vote, which was much higher than people thought I was going to get. So, we are going to be working very hard on the inner cities, having to do with education, having to do with crime. We’re going to try and fix as quickly as possible  —   you know, it takes a long time. It’s taken more a hundred years and more for some of these places to evolve and they evolved, many of them, very badly. But we’re going to be working very hard on health and healthcare, very, very hard on education, and also we’re going to be working in a stringent way, in a very good way, on crime. You go to some of these inner city places and it’s so sad when you look at the crime. You have people  —   and I’ve seen this, and I’ve sort of witnessed it  —   in fact, in two cases I have actually witnessed it. They lock themselves into apartments, petrified to even leave, in the middle of the day. They’re living in hell. We can’t let that happen. So, we’re going to be very, very strong. That’s a great question and  —   and it’s a  —   it’s a very difficult situation because it’s been many, many years. It’s been festering for many, many years. But we have places in this country that we have to fix. We have to help African American people that, for the most part, are stuck there. Hispanic American people. We have Hispanic American people that are in the inner cities and their living in hell. I mean, you look at the numbers in Chicago. There are two Chicagos, as you know. There’s one Chicago that’s incredible, luxurious and all  —   and safe. There’s another Chicago that’s worse than almost any of the places in the Middle East that we talk, and that you talk about, every night on the newscasts. So, we’re going to do a lot of work on the inner cities. I have great people lined up to help with the inner cities. OK? QUESTION: Well, when you say the inner cities, are you going  —   are you going to include the CBC, Mr. President, in your conversations with your  —   your urban agenda, your inner city agenda, as well as  —   TRUMP: Am I going to include who? QUESTION: Are you going to include the Congressional Black Caucus and the Congressional  —   TRUMP: Well, I would. I tell you what, do you want to set up the meeting? QUESTION:  —   Hispanic Caucus  —   TRUMP: Do you want to set up the meeting? QUESTION: No  —   no  —   no. I’m not  —   TRUMP: Are they friends of yours? QUESTION: I’m just a reporter. TRUMP: Well, then( ph) set up the meeting. QUESTION: I know some of them, but I’m sure they’re watching right now. TRUMP: Let’s go set up a meeting. I would love to meet with the Black Caucus. I think it’s great, the Congressional Black Caucus. I think it’s great. I actually thought I had a meeting with Congressman Cummings and he was all excited. And then he said, well, I can’t move, it might be bad for me politically. I can’t have that meeting. I was all set to have the meeting. You know, we called him and called him. And he was all set. I spoke to him on the phone, very nice guy. QUESTION: I hear he wanted that meeting with you as well. TRUMP: He wanted it, but we called, called, called and can’t make a meeting with him. Every day I walk and say I would like to meet with him because I do want to solve the problem. But he probably was told by Schumer or somebody like that, some other lightweight. He was probably told  —   he was probably told “don’t meet with Trump. It’s bad politics. ” And that’s part of the problem in this country. OK, one more. QUESTION: (inaudible) TRUMP: No, no, one question. Two we can’t handle. This room can’t handle two. Go ahead, give me the better of your two. QUESTION: (inaudible) . ..not about your personality or your beliefs, talking about (inaudible) some of it by supporters in your name. What do you. .. TRUMP: . ..And some of it  —   can I be honest with you? And this has to do with racism and horrible things that are put up. Some of it written by our opponents. You do know that. Do you understand that? You don’t think anybody would do a thing like that. Some of the signs you’ll see are not put up by the people that love or like Donald Trump, they’re put up by the other side and you think it’s like playing it straight? No. But you have some of those signs and some of that anger is caused by the other side. They’ll do signs and they’ll do drawings that are inappropriate. It won’t be my people. It will be the people on the other side to anger people like you. OK. (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: Go ahead, go ahead. QUESTION: You’re the president now. What are you going to do about it? TRUMP: Who is that? Where is that? QUESTION: What are you going to do about  —   what are you going to do about (inaudible). TRUMP: Oh, I’m working on it. I’m working on it very  —   no, no, look. Hey, just so you understand, we had a totally divided country for eight years and long before that. In all fairness to President Obama, long before President Obama we have had a very divided  —   I didn’t come along and divide this country. This country was seriously divided before I got here. We’re going to work on it very hard. One of the questions I was asked, I thought it was a very good question was about the inner cities. I mean, that’s part of it. But we’re going to work on education, we’re going to work on  —   you know, we’re going to stop  —   we’re going to try and stop the crime. We have great law enforcement officials, we’re going to try and stop crime. We’re not going to try and stop, we’re going to stop crime. But it’s very important to me  —   but this isn’t Donald Trump that divided a nation. We went eight years with President Obama and we went many years before President Obama. We lived in a divided nation. And I am going to try  —   I will do everything within my power to fix that. I want to thank everybody very much. It’s a great honor to be with you. Thank you. Thank you very much, thanks. END

2 - One night six years ago, on a quiet side street in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, I came across a photo album that had been put out with the trash. I lived around the corner, and I was walking home when I saw it sitting beneath a streetlamp on Lincoln Place. It looked handmade, with a wooden cover bound with a shoelace. But it had been tied up with twine, like a bunch of old newspapers, and left atop a pile of recycling. After hesitating a moment, I picked it up and took it home. The pages were fragile, and they cracked when I turned them, as if the album hadn’t been opened in a long time, but the photos were perfectly preserved. They seemed to chronicle the life of a black couple at midcentury: a beautiful woman with a big smile and a man who looked serious, or was maybe just   and had served in World War II. As I turned the pages, the scenery changed from country picnics to city streets and crowded dance halls in what appeared to be Harlem, and the couple went from youth to middle age. Looking at the album, I was struck by how joyful the photos were  —   and by the fact that as fabled as this era was, I had never seen a black family’s own account of that time. I wondered who these neighbors were, and who had thrown the album out. For decades, this part of Crown Heights had been mostly black. When I arrived in the neighborhood, several years before, I was one of the few nonblack residents on the block. The neighborhood was changing, though newcomers were arriving and longtime residents were moving out. I went back to Lincoln Place, hoping to find the album’s owner it had surely been thrown out by mistake. Lincoln Place was the very image of old Brooklyn promoted by real estate agents. On other blocks, the houses were carved up or crumbling. Or they had been torn down and replaced by big buildings with spotlights and   signs. But on Lincoln Place, the stately rowhouses were still intact and well loved. The block was preserved in amber. I knocked on doors and left my number, but I never heard from anyone. So I put the album on my bookshelf. A few years later, my landlords got an offer they couldn’t refuse, and my short time in Crown Heights was up. I stumbled upon the album while packing and pulled it off the shelf. Now I really had to reckon with it. Gentrification was transforming the neighborhood  —   soon there might be no one left who recognized the world in these pictures. And the album was literally falling apart in my hands. If I was ever going to try to get to the bottom of it, this was the time. I decided to uncover its story. I thought it would be simple. But chasing the album would become something of a journey, one that would take me far from   Brooklyn to the Jim Crow South, from a remote island in the Pacific to the packed tenements of Harlem, before returning me to Lincoln Place at another moment of great change. Last spring, I began the search. The photos were arranged on black   pages with little mounting corners and Scotch tape that had turned yellow with age. There were 167 pictures, and they covered both sides of the pages, as if to save space. But the photos stopped about halfway through the album. The rest of it was blank. I looked behind every photo, but there were only a few clues, handwritten notes like “From your old pal Duke,” “Myself and Sylvia” or “Love to Etta Mae, From Dorothy. ” The name Etta Mae was written on three or four photos, and I began to suspect she was the woman who appeared throughout the album. She had a full figure and elegant hands. She smoked. But I always spotted her by her smile. She was often with the same man. They were embracing, or they were in separate photos on the same page. I guessed that he was her husband on one photo, someone had written, “To my best friend’s hubby. ” Carrying photocopies of a few pictures, I went back to Crown Heights. I had been gone less than two years, but there were all sorts of changes. On Nostrand Avenue, a West Indian market that had carried buckets of salt cod had closed. Where once the only coffee had come in yellow cans of Bustelo, cafes served locally roasted espresso. There was a retro cocktail bar. On Lincoln Place, a   sign hung outside one house, and another was under renovation. There was a Pilates studio. There were more young families now, and when I asked them about the album as they swept the sidewalk or sat on their stoops, they apologized: They were new to the block and couldn’t help. One evening, I was close to giving up when a young man in a garden apartment told me to talk to Jimmy, the oldest guy on the block. He pointed to a red house a few doors down. An old man answered the door. Yes, he said, he was Jimmy  —   James Burton. I showed him the photocopied pictures, and he squinted. “That’s Mrs. Taylor,” he said. “Etta Mae. ” The man in the pictures was her husband, Isaiah Taylor. Everyone called him Ike, Mr. Burton said. The Taylors had lived on Lincoln Place forever. He pointed next door, at a white house with classical molding. When I returned to Lincoln Place a few days later with the whole album, Mr. Burton and his wife, Lenore, were doing a puzzle at a card table. “You say you just found this album on the street?” she asked, laughing. “I wouldn’t touch it. I’m amazed you would touch it. ” “Would you pick it up?” she asked her husband. “Maybe,” he said. They were in their late 80s. Ms. Burton had worked as a bookkeeper, and Mr. Burton had been a chauffeur and a shipping clerk. They had lived on Lincoln Place since the early 1950s, and raised their two daughters there. The Taylors had been their neighbors and close friends, almost like family. “In those days, we knew most everybody, and then they started disappearing and dying and moving away,” Mr. Burton said. “Now I’m lucky if I know 10 people. ” We sat on the couch and opened the album. Pages had torn loose from the binding, and as we passed them between us, black flakes fluttered to the floor. “No, no,” Mr. Burton said, peering at the faces to see if he recognized anyone. “Etta and Ike. That’s all I know is them two. ” Halfway through, we came to a page crowded with small pictures. Mr. Burton paused. “That looks like me,” he said, his voice a little louder. “Your mother, Uncle Fernando  —   that’s my wedding. ” I was hooked. Now that I had names, I enlisted a researcher at The New York Times, Susan C. Beachy, and she pulled documents for Etta Mae Taylor: census records birth, death and marriage certificates old phone books newspaper clippings. Etta Mae didn’t have children. Her siblings had all died. But she had relatives scattered across the country. The Burtons remembered a niece from North Carolina, and the researcher found someone in Raleigh named Joann Barnes. She was now in her 70s. For months, the only other thing I knew about her was that she didn’t pick up her phone. I didn’t blame her. “Hello,” I would say when I left voice mail messages, “I’m calling about a photo album that may have belonged to your family. ” Even as I said it, I knew it sounded like a scam. I tried her relatives, calling, sending emails and friendly Facebook messages, but always with the same result: silence. The documents, at least, gave me the beginnings of Etta Mae’s story. Etta Mae Barnes was born on July 28, 1918, in Wilson, N. C. which once called itself the world’s greatest   tobacco market. When Ms. Taylor was young, it was a boomtown. Thousands of   families had migrated to Wilson from the countryside to pick tobacco on farms and hang it in big warehouses downtown. The first pages in the album seemed to be of Wilson several photos had stamps from photographers’ studios there. There were portraits of women in flouncy dresses, babies, a boy with a dog, a group in straw hats in a field. In two portraits placed side by side, a   couple posed by a flowering bush, in front of a clapboard house. I wondered if they were Etta Mae’s parents. Etta Mae’s mother, Anna Bell Green Barnes, was born in Virginia and worked as a hanger at a tobacco company, the documents revealed. Her father, James Frank Barnes, was a grocery store clerk. His family went back generations in Wilson County. Etta Mae was one of six. When she was still a child, her oldest brother, Charles, boarded the train that passed through Wilson and became part of what we now call the Great Migration, the exodus of millions of black Southerners from the Jim Crow South. Judging from the album, many of Etta Mae’s relatives had gone north I could tell them apart from their country kin by their suits and furs. Etta Mae left school after seventh grade and went to work as a housekeeper in a private home, according to the 1940 census. That year, 10 other people were living at the Barneses’ including an aunt an adopted daughter Etta Mae’s sister Mildred Mildred’s husband, Jack Artis and their baby, Charles. In 1940, Etta Mae left her crowded home. But she didn’t go north just yet. She went to Suffolk, Va. where, according to her marriage license, she wed Isaiah Taylor on the day after her 22nd birthday. Ike Taylor was three years younger than Etta Mae, and when they married, he had recently graduated from high school and was working as a deliveryman. His father was a cook. His mother worked at a peanut processing plant. Suffolk, like Wilson, was segregated, unofficially divided by the railroad tracks. On one side, a sizable black community had grown, drawn by jobs in the factories of peanut producers like Planters. The Taylors’ wedding announcement in a local paper said, “The couple will reside here. ” But in 1941, the United States entered World War II, and farm work had grown scarce amid an agriculture crisis. Hundreds of thousands of black Southerners rushed to enlist, and Ike was one of them. There were about a dozen photographs from the war in the album, loose snapshots tucked in the back. They showed black soldiers amid spindly trees and what looked like Japanese shrines. Ike was an army truck commander in the 510th Port Battalion and rose to the rank of master sergeant, according to his military records. His unit was stationed on Tinian, an island in the Pacific that the United States captured from the Japanese, where the armed forces built a huge air base. (It was from Tinian that the Enola Gay took off for Hiroshima.) Today, most of the men in Ike’s unit would be approaching 100, if they were alive at all, and I had given up on getting a firsthand account, when I found a videotaped interview with a member of the 510th in the Library of Congress. James W. Taylor (no relation to Ike) died in 2014. In the video, he described their time in the army. The armed forces were still segregated, and there were almost no black combat units until troops thinned at the end of the war black soldiers were instead relegated to labor and service units. Their battalion unloaded ammunition from ships and provided transport. On Tinian, they lived apart from the white soldiers. They slept in tents in a separate camp, ate separately and drank from water tanks that they filled, separately, from a mountain spring. These men may have enlisted in the army to escape Jim Crow, but instead they found themselves on a tropical island in the Pacific that had become a replica of the segregated South. This was where records trailed off. To go any further, I needed a guide. One night in the fall, I found one. I got a Facebook message from someone in Wilson named Craig Barnes Jr. whom I had written to months before. “Sorry, I’m just seeing this now,” he said. “Do you still have that photo?” I replied immediately with a smiley face. “I have the entire album!” Over the phone, Mr. Barnes, 25, said that he was related to Etta Mae, but that he didn’t know much about her the person to talk to was his grandmother, Joann Barnes  —   the woman in Raleigh who hadn’t taken my calls. He promised to set up a conversation, but weeks went by. When we finally spoke, he had bad news: She wasn’t answering the phone. But that was all I had. So a week later, I boarded a flight for Raleigh, the album in my bag. I met up with a photographer and we drove to the last listed address for Ms. Barnes: a retirement complex in a   apartment building surrounded by trees. I was unsure if she even lived there, much less how she would feel about my visit, and as we approached, I felt nervous for the first time. I had come all this way, and though I thought the album was important, maybe I was just intruding. I pressed the buzzer and identified myself over the intercom as a reporter from New York. After a long moment, a woman’s voice crackled through the speaker. “All right,” she said. “I’ll buzz you in, dear. ” As we walked down the hall toward her apartment, Ms. Barnes stepped out from her door, as if she planned to give us only a minute. She had short gray hair and wore a   blouse. “Are you a relative of Etta Mae Taylor?” I asked. “Yes, I was her niece,” she said. I explained, quickly, how I had met the Burtons, that they had told me Etta Mae’s name and that I should look for her niece. “O. K.,” she said. “And, well,” I said, “basically, I found this on the street. ” I held out the album. She gave a surprised laugh. I laughed too, with relief. “You know, it kind of makes you leery,” Ms. Barnes said. She had gotten my messages, and her grandson’s, but she was skeptical because she had never seen her aunt’s photo album. She invited us in. Her apartment was small and neat. She had been cleaning, and after she washed her hands, we sat down. She was from Wilson, she said, but she left when she was young and spent nearly 30 years in New York, where she was a visiting nurse. She opened the album. “Oh, my goodness,” she said. “These are from way back. ” She spotted her grandparents  —   Etta Mae’s parents  —   in front of the clapboard house in Wilson where she, too, had grown up. There, in the yard, they played horseshoes and caught pigeons. She named her aunts and uncles and cousins. “And that’s me,” she said, touching a photo of a little girl. “I always liked this picture. I believe my father made this skirt. He used to make clothes for me when I was small. And I always had those big bows. ” She shook her head and smiled. “Little knock knees,” she said. Wilson was about an hour’s drive east. The downtown was deserted, the brick warehouses the only remnant of the tobacco era. Across the tracks, the house where Etta Mae grew up had been torn down. In the empty lot where it once stood, there was no trace of the family that had become so real to me. A pickup was parked in the overgrown grass. Most of Etta Mae’s family had left Wilson and scattered, but Craig Barnes Jr. was still there. We met up at an Applebee’s off the highway. I thanked him for writing to me and handed him the album. As he turned the pages, I said I had never seen a black family’s photos from this era. He said he hadn’t either. “The lifestyle they’re living looks amazing,” he said. In Etta Mae’s day, the magic of Harlem reached the South through newspapers, relatives’ letters and the radio, and in the 1940s, another wave of Southern migrants moved to New York, drawn by Cab Calloway and Duke Ellington as much as by the promise of factory jobs. “New York was the place to be,” Ms. Barnes said. While Ike was in the Pacific, Etta Mae joined her sister Mildred and her husband, along with her brother Charles, in Harlem, and the sisters found jobs pressing drapes at a factory in the garment district. “They were pressers,” Ms. Barnes said. “That was kind of the going job at the time. ” When the war was over, Ike and Etta Mae were reunited in New York. On weekends, they would go dancing  —   at small clubs and at the blocklong Savoy Ballroom on Lenox Avenue, where thousands of couples did the jitterbug. From the time she was little, Ms. Barnes would take the train every year to visit the Taylors. “I was a Southern girl I used to go every summer with my grandmother,” she said. “When I would see them dressed up, it was exciting. Like these were some movie stars or something. ” Of her two aunts, Ms. Barnes said, Etta Mae was the serious one. “Mae thought she was the boss. She always thought she was smarter than everybody else. She was always saying, ‘Sister, you shouldn’t do that Sister, you should. ’” But she loved to dance, Ms. Barnes said. “And she could sing, too. ” The photos speak to the glamour of life in Harlem, but they barely hint at its struggles. Housing discrimination largely confined black people to Harlem, and in the 1940s, as more Southern migrants surged into the city, its blocks became some of the most densely populated in the world. Landlords charged high rents and let their buildings fall into ruin. They knew their tenants had nowhere else to go. After riots broke out in 1943, Langston Hughes wrote of Harlemites’ poverty and frustration: “Some of them don’t try anymore.   I reckon. ” Etta Mae and her sister lived in a packed tenement on West 116th Street. Their brother Charles, who in the album looks dashing in a dark suit with a pocket square, worked as a deliveryman for a florist, and shared his apartment on 131st Street with his wife and seven lodgers from the South. In the middle of the album was a series of oversize portraits of couples gathered around   tables in night clubs. I couldn’t figure out where they were taken until a clue cropped up in an old newspaper: Ike was listed among the members of the Eight Chaps Social Club, a men’s club composed of Suffolkians that was hosting a dance in Harlem. Seven of the Chaps were dead now, but the eighth picked up the phone. “Isaiah Taylor?” Walter Howell, 95, said. Of course he remembered him. “Good buddy of mine. ” He told me the photos were, indeed, from the club’s dances. They look glamorous, but all of the Chaps, Mr. Howell said, had   jobs. He had worked in a   plant preparing minks and sables. Then he answered a question that hadn’t occurred to me, which was why the Taylors had such a dazzling record of their social life. The reason was that one member of the club, Jesse Williams, was a professional photographer. Craig Steven Wilder, a historian at M. I. T. told me that for Southern migrants far from home, men’s clubs like the Eight Chaps “become their new kinship networks. ” “That informal network is how you access news about where you can move,” Professor Wilder said, “where black people are moving and welcome. ” In 1950, the population of Central Harlem reached its peak, and   began to inch their way into other boroughs. The Eight Chaps scattered. Etta Mae and Ike, of course, went to Brooklyn. Crown Heights was predominantly white at the time. And when Etta Mae and Ike moved to Lincoln Place around 1950, renting a room from a black hairdresser named Lucille Stewart, they became some of the first black residents on the block. The Burtons, the neighbors whose wedding photos were in the album, came soon after. “We were about the second blacks on the block,” Lenore Burton said. Ms. Burton’s parents, Clara and Cannon Harper, moved into the white house with the classical molding, with their daughter Jackie. After they got married, the Burtons bought the red house next door. Etta Mae and Ike soon moved into the third floor of the Harpers’ white house, and the two households became like one. Etta Mae’s album captures their communal life: They shared meals, gave each other haircuts, gathered in the kitchen in their bathrobes. Ms. Burton’s sister, Jackie Jones, still lives in the white house that she grew up in and eventually inherited from her parents. On one of my visits to the Burtons’ she appeared, magically, in their living room: Back in the 1950s, they had installed a door between their homes. “All the families were intertwined more or less, though they weren’t blood relations,” Ms. Jones, 89, said. The picture the Burtons painted of the 1950s was a happy one. And it took me a moment to step back and see the obvious: During this time, as black people arrived on Lincoln Place, white families were leaving. Isabel Wilkerson, the author of “The Warmth of Other Suns: The Epic Story of America’s Great Migration,” said the timing was not a coincidence. “Fear led many white residents to flee,” she said. “Neighborhoods began to open up because white people were so fearful that they would sell at a loss. ” It was a sign of what was coming. In the next decades, hundreds of thousands of white families would leave the city, and black families would move into their homes, a phenomenon that came to be known as white flight. In 1950, the Taylors’ census tract was 95 percent white. By 1970, it was 87 percent black. White flight is often associated with the poverty and crime that plagued New York City in the later decades of the 20th century, and conjures images of muggings, abandoned buildings and urban blight. But these photos too were images of the   era: People posing beside a 1950s television console, a man at a piano, a sunny picnic. In 1956, the new homeowners formed the Lincoln Civic Block Association, which still exists. “There was a Pokeno circle, a poker circle,” Mr. Burton said. “You’d go from house to house. Nobody had a lock on the door. Our house was never locked. You’d look up, and there’d be cousin   . ” The Burtons pointed out a few houses on Lincoln Place where   still lived. A neighbor, Marilyn LeGall, 72, grew up visiting her aunt and uncle on Lincoln Place. “You played stickball, you jumped rope,” she said. “Everyone looked after the other. ” That was life on Lincoln Place, said Arthur Bates Jr. 56, who grew up on the block. “It was a real neighborhood, and a black experience no one talks about, because it wasn’t filled with drugs and it wasn’t filled with poverty,” Mr. Bates said. “It was public schools, it was playing ball, it was playing music. ” Now, he added, everyone was discovering brownstone Brooklyn. “It’s been sitting here, like so many aspects of our lives. People say, ‘It’s dripping with original details.’ Who do you think maintained it? Where were you?” Etta Mae and Ike settled down on Lincoln Place after a decade of war and uncertainty and living in cramped quarters in Harlem. Etta Mae kept working in the garment district. She went bargain hunting on Flatbush Avenue for outfits and nice furniture for their apartment. She joined a book club. Ike got dogs  —   and cars. “A blue Chevy,” Mr. Burton recalled. On the weekends, they would go to their dances, and Mildred came over. They drank cocktails and listened to records. “They were   folks,” Ms. Jones said. “You could come and sit and drink and smoke and laugh. They loved to laugh. ” They traveled, driving south to see one of Ike’s sisters in Washington, and to their hometowns. In the 1960s, they went on cruises. New York gave them a good life. And if it was lived in the shadow of white flight, it was a life they never could have had in the South. Ike’s niece, Brenda Oliver, 67, remembered her aunt arriving in Virginia wearing pretty clothes, smelling good. Ms. Oliver’s mother was a maid. “My mom lived in a house with a coal stove. She was so impressed that her siblings had gotten out of the South and made a life for themselves. ” In their later years, Ike and Etta Mae look content. In one photo, they stand beside each other, she in a dress, he in a suit. She is giving him a knowing little smile. His arm is around her shoulder. It is the last photo of the two of them together. On Aug. 5, 1971, Ike died of cancer. He was 50. After he died, Etta Mae stopped keeping the album. That was why half of the pages were blank. Etta Mae stayed on Lincoln Place. She took care of children for working couples, recalled the Burtons’ daughter, Carol Burton, 58. Etta Mae got books in the mail, never putting them on the shelf until they were read. She went to church every Sunday, at Berean Baptist nearby. She took in relatives once or twice, for brief spells, but otherwise lived alone. I found former residents of Lincoln Place. They remembered Etta Mae, but not as the young woman in the album. “She was always an old lady,” Sherrie Tanner Hammonds, 47, said. She grew up on the block with her grandmother, Ms. Stewart, the hairdresser, and now lives in Rochester. “She always had a small dog. She had a little set schedule. She would walk morning and night. ” “Rain or shine,” said Constance P. Jermin, 83, who left Lincoln Place for Georgia in 2002. “She was very deliberate and devoted. And she always greeted everyone. Always with a big smile. ” For a few years, Etta Mae and I shared the block. Our bedroom windows looked out on the same backyards, and every day, she must have walked past my house, though I can’t recall if I ever actually saw her. When she could no longer get around, Ms. Jones, her landlady, took care of her. “She was feisty,” said Ms. Jones, who said she never raised her rent from $200. “She was good until the end. ” The end was swift. In 2010, Etta Mae fell and went to the hospital, and from there, to a nursing home in East New York, Brooklyn. She died there, five long miles from Lincoln Place, on June 4, 2011. She was 92. She is buried next to her husband at Long Island National Cemetery, a veterans’ graveyard in Farmingdale, N. Y. They share a single headstone, their names on either side. Etta Mae’s funeral program ends, “Etta lived a full life. ” It was all in the album: the Great Migration, Harlem at its most chaotic and crowded, the transformation of Brooklyn. For her neighbors on Lincoln Place, Etta Mae’s album brought back happy memories of their first years on the block, but it did not stop the clock from ticking. In October, Lenore Burton died. Her widower, James Burton, plans to stay in their home on Lincoln Place. For Etta Mae’s family, the album helped fill the void left by relatives who moved to the North. They let me hold onto the album until the publication of this article. I had one last question: How did the album end up on the curb? After her aunt died, Joann Barnes came from Raleigh to arrange the funeral in Brooklyn. She hadn’t been to Lincoln Place in years and was surprised by how little her aunt’s home had changed. She had moved into the back rooms and left the rest untouched. Everything was from the 1950s  —   the kitchen sink and cabinets, the furniture in the living room, which was covered in plastic. In Ike’s old office, there was a record player, hundreds of records, and a shelf with glasses and little stirrers, the remnants of his bar. The closets were stuffed with linens and old clothes. When she went to dry her hands after washing them in the bathroom, the hand towel was so old it split in two. She was tired from the funeral, and overwhelmed. She just wanted to get home. She packed up some wedding dishes for her sister, a few pots and pans. For herself, she took some change from a drawer. “A silver dollar, some old coins,” she said. “That’s just me. I have my memory of her and our trips and what we did together. I’m not a keeper. ” As she got ready to go, Ms. Jones came in. “She asked me if I was coming back,” Ms. Barnes said, “and I said no. ‘Open the doors and let the neighbors come and take what they want. Just open it up. ’” In the weeks afterward, Ms. Jones worked her way through the apartment. She bagged up the clothes. She pulled the records off the shelf. She boxed up Etta Mae’s books. When she found the album, she tied it up with twine. And one evening, before the trucks came to pick up the recycling, she carried it outside with a few boxes and left it on the curb. A few minutes, or a few hours, passed. Then, just as Etta Mae had walked past my house so many times before, I walked by hers, picked up her album and carried it home.

2 - Joachim Neander was a   Calvinist theologian who often hiked through a valley outside Düsseldorf, Germany, writing hymns. Neander understood everything around him as a manifestation of the Lord’s will and work. There was no room in his worldview for randomness, only purpose and praise. “See how God this rolling   with beauty as a robe,” one of his verses goes. “Forests, fields, and living   its Master’s glory sings. ” He wrote dozens of hymns like this  —     and  . Then he caught tuberculosis and died at 30. Almost two centuries later, in the summer of 1856, workers quarrying limestone in that valley dug up an unusual skull. It was elongated and almost chinless, and the fossilized bones found alongside it were extra thick and fit together oddly. This was three years before Darwin published “The Origin of Species. ” The science of human origins was not a science the assumption was that our ancestors had always looked like us, all the way back to Adam. (Even distinguishing fossils from ordinary rock was beyond the grasp of many scientists. One popular method involved licking them if the material had animal matter in it, it stuck to your tongue.) And so, as anomalous as these German bones seemed, most scholars had no trouble finding satisfying explanations. A leading theory held that this was the skeleton of a lost, bowlegged Cossack with rickets. The peculiar bony ridge over the man’s eyes was a result of the poor Cossack’s perpetually furrowing his brow in pain  —   because of the rickets. One British geologist, William King, suspected something more radical. Instead of being the remains of an atypical human, they might have belonged to a typical member of an alternate humanity. In 1864, he published a paper introducing it as such  —   an extinct human species, the first ever discovered. King named this species after the valley where it was found, which itself had been named for the ecstatic poet who once wandered it. He called it Homo neanderthalensis: Neanderthal Man. Who was Neanderthal Man? King felt obligated to describe him. But with no established techniques for interpreting archaeological material like the skull, he fell back on racism and phrenology. He focused on the peculiarities of the Neanderthal’s skull, including the “enormously projecting brow. ” No living humans had skeletal features remotely like these, but King was under the impression that the skulls of contemporary African and Australian aboriginals resembled the Neanderthals’ more than “ordinary”   skulls. So extrapolating from his low opinion of what he called these “savage” races, he explained that the Neanderthal’s skull alone was proof of its moral “darkness” and stupidity. “The thoughts and desires which once dwelt within it never soared beyond those of a brute,” he wrote. Other scientists piled on. So did the popular press. We knew almost nothing about Neanderthals, but already we assumed they were ogres and losers. The genesis of this idea, the historian Paige Madison notes, largely comes down to flukes of “timing and luck. ” While King was working, another British scientist, George Busk, had the same suspicions about the Neander skull. He had received a comparable one, too, from the tiny British territory of Gibraltar. The Gibraltar skull was dug up long before the Neander Valley specimen surfaced, but local hobbyists simply labeled it “human skull” and forgot about it for the next 16 years. Its brow ridge wasn’t as prominent as the Neander skull’s, and its features were less imposing it was a woman’s skull, it turns out. Busk dashed off a quick report but stopped short of naming the new creature. He hoped to study additional fossils and learn more. Privately, he considered calling it Homo calpicus, or Gibraltar Man. So, what if Busk  —   “a conscientious naturalist too cautious to make premature claims,” as Madison describes him  —   had beaten King to publication? Consider how different our first impressions of a Gibraltar Woman might have been from those of Neanderthal Man: what feelings of sympathy, or even kinship, this other skull might have stirred. There is a worldview, the opposite of Joachim Neander’s, that sees our planet as a product of only tumult and indifference. In such a world, it’s possible for an entire species to be ground into extinction by forces beyond its control and then, 40, 000 years later, be dug up and made to endure an additional century and a half of bad luck and abuse. That’s what happened to the Neanderthals. And it’s what we did to them. But recently, after we’d snickered over their skulls for so long, it stopped being clear who the boneheads were. I’ll start with a confession, an embarrassing but relevant one, because I would come to see our history with Neanderthals as continually distorted by an unfortunate human tendency to believe in ideas that are, in reality, incorrect  —   and then to leverage that conviction into a feeling of superiority over other people. And in retrospect, I realize I demonstrated that same tendency myself at the beginning of this project. Because I don’t want to come off as   or as pointing fingers, here goes: Before traveling to Gibraltar last summer, I had no idea what Gibraltar was. Or rather, I was sure I knew what Gibraltar was, but I was wrong. I thought it was just that famous Rock  —   an unpopulated hunk of   geology, which, if I’m being honest, I recognized mostly from the Prudential logo: that limestone protuberance at the mouth of the Mediterranean, that elephantine white molar jutting into the sky. True, I was traveling to Gibraltar on short notice when I   the director of the Gibraltar Museum, Clive Finlayson, he told me the museum happened to be starting its annual excavation of a Neanderthal cave there the following week and invited me to join. Still, even a couple of days before I left, when a friend told me she faintly remembered spending an afternoon in Gibraltar once as a teenager, I gently mansplained to her that I was pretty sure she was mistaken: Gibraltar, I told her, wasn’t somewhere you could just go. In my mind, I had privileged access. I pictured myself and Finlayson taking a special little boat. In fact, Gibraltar is a peninsula connected to Spain. It’s a lively British overseas territory, with 30, 000 citizens living in a city on its western side  —   a city with bakeries and clothing stores and tourists buying all the usual kitsch. Some unusual kitsch, too  —   like a laminated child’s place mat I spotted that, in a typical tourist destination, might say something unexceptional like SOMEONE WHO LOVES ME WENT TO GIBRALTAR, but here read WE SHALL NEVER SURRENDER! BRITISH FOREVER! The history of Gibraltar, given its strategic location, is a grinding saga of military sieges and ruthlessly contested changes in ownership. The residue of that strife, today, is a pronounced British patriotism and a   exchange of slights with Spain, which still disputes Britain’s claim to the territory. After Queen Elizabeth II’s Diamond Jubilee, in 2012, when Gibraltar projected towering images of Her Majesty on a   side of the Rock  —   “a clear act of provocation,” one reporter called it  —   Spain began inspecting vehicle after vehicle at the border, backing up the line for hours, stranding the bulk of Gibraltar’s work force, who commute in every day. The afternoon I showed up, activists from a   Spanish political party had crossed into Gibraltar and hung an enormous Spanish flag high up on the Rock. This wasn’t just mischief. It was regarded as an act of symbolic terrorism. When one of the men appeared in court two days later, I read, a woman screamed at him, “Gibraltar will never be Spanish!” She sounded like that defiant place mat come to life. I happened to arrive in Gibraltar the week of the Brexit vote. Up in England, people were thundering about the working class versus elites, sovereignty and immigration, warning that British identity was being fouled by the European project. But in Gibraltar  —   a   fully detached nib of Britain, flanked by water on two sides and Spain on the third  —   the question was less philosophical: If the United Kingdom left the European Union, Spain might seize the opportunity to isolate Gibraltar, leaving the territory to shrivel up, like a flap of dead skin. The Gibraltarian government had already called on the House of Commons for help. There was concern that Spain would jam up the border again and that it might happen right away. Around town, “Remain” signs hung everywhere. The atmosphere was edgy, as though everyone was holding hands, waiting to see whether a meteor would hit. It was like the hairline cracks between so many     and Thems seemed to be widening, and some corrosive, molten goop was seeping out: mutual dependence curdled with contempt. Clearly it was happening back home in America too. All in all, it was a good week to spend in a cave. Gorham’s Cave is on Gibraltar’s   eastern coast: a tremendous opening at the bottom of the sheer face of the Rock, shadowy and   like a cathedral. Its mouth is 200 feet across at the base and 120 feet tall. It tapers asymmetrically like a crumpled wizard’s hat. Neanderthals inhabited Gorham’s Cave on and off for 100, 000 years, as well as a second cave next to it, called Vanguard Cave. The artifacts they left behind were buried as wind pushed sand into the cave. This created a high sloping dune, composed of hundreds of distinct layers of sand, each of which was once the surface of the dune, the floor of the cave. The dune is enormous. It reaches about   of the way up Gorham’s walls, spilling out of the cave’s mouth and onto the rocky beach, like a colossal cat’s tongue lapping at the Mediterranean. Every summer, since 1989, a team of archaeologists has returned to meticulously clear that sand away and recover the material inside. “I realized a long time ago, I won’t live to see the end of this project,” Finlayson, who leads the excavation, told me. “But I think we’re in a great moment. We’re beginning to understand these people after a century of putting them down as apelike brutes. ” Neanderthals are people, too  —   a separate,   branch of our family tree. We last shared an ancestor at some point between 500, 000 and 750, 000 years ago. Then our evolutionary trajectory split. We evolved in Africa, while the Neanderthals would live in Europe and Asia for 300, 000 years. Or as little as 60, 000 years. It depends whom you ask. It always does: The study of human origins, I found, is riddled with vehement disagreements and scientists who readily dismantle the premises of even the most   questions. (In this case, the uncertainty rests, in part, on when, in this long evolutionary process, Neanderthals officially became “Neanderthals. ”) What is clearer is that roughly 40, 000 years ago, just as our own lineage expanded from Africa and took over Eurasia, the Neanderthals disappeared. Scientists have always assumed that the timing wasn’t coincidental. Maybe we used our superior intellects to outcompete the Neanderthals for resources maybe we clubbed them all to death. Whatever the mechanism of this   replacement, it seemed to imply that our kind was somehow better than their kind. We’re still here, after all, and their path ended as soon as we crossed paths. But Neanderthals weren’t the   louts we’ve imagined them to be  —   not just a bunch of Neanderthals. As a review of findings published last year put it, they were actually “very similar” to their contemporary Homo sapiens in Africa, in terms of “standard markers of modern cognitive and behavioral capacities. ” We’ve always classified Neanderthals, technically, as human  —   part of the genus Homo. But it turns out they also did the stuff that, you know, makes us human. Neanderthals buried their dead. They made jewelry and specialized tools. They made ocher and other pigments, perhaps to paint their faces or bodies  —   evidence of a “symbolically mediated worldview,” as archaeologists call it. Their tracheal anatomy suggests that they were capable of language and probably had   raspy voices, like Julia Child. They manufactured glue from birch bark, which required heating the bark to at least 644 degrees Fahrenheit  —   a feat scientists find difficult to duplicate without a ceramic container. In Gibraltar, there’s evidence that Neanderthals extracted the feathers of certain birds  —   only dark feathers  —   possibly for aesthetic or ceremonial purposes. And while Neanderthals were once presumed to be crude scavengers, we now know they exploited the different terrains on which they lived. They took down dangerous game, including an extinct species of rhinoceros. Some ate seals and other marine mammals. Some ate shellfish. Some ate chamomile. (They had regional cuisines.) They used toothpicks. Wearing feathers, eating seals  —   maybe none of this sounds particularly impressive. But it’s what our human ancestors were capable of back then too, and scientists have always considered such behavioral flexibility and complexity as signs of our specialness. When it came to Neanderthals, though, many researchers literally couldn’t see the evidence sitting in front of them. A lot of the new thinking about Neanderthals comes from revisiting material in museum collections, excavated decades ago, and   it with new technology or simply with open minds. The real surprise of these discoveries may not be the competence of Neanderthals but how obnoxiously low our expectations for them have been  —   the bias with which too many scientists approached that other Us. One archaeologist called these researchers “modern human supremacists. ” Inside Gorham’s Cave, archaeologists were excavating what they called a hearth  —   not a physical fireplace but a spot in the sand where, around 50, 000 years ago, Neanderthals lit a fire. Each summer, the Gibraltar Museum employs students from universities in England and Spain to work the dig, and now two young women  —   one from each country  —   sat   under work lights, clearing sand away with the edge of a trowel and a brush to leave a   cube. A black band of charcoal ran through it. The students worked scrupulously, watching for small animal bones or artifacts. They’d pulled out a butchered ibex mandible, a number of mollusk shells and   husks. They’d also found six chunks of fossilized hyena dung, as well as “débitage,” distinctive shards of flint left over when Neanderthals shattered larger pieces to make axes. The cube of sand would eventually be wrapped in plaster and sent for analysis. The sand the two women were sweeping into their dustpans was transferred into plastic bags and marched out of the cave, down to the beach, where other students sieved it. Smaller bones caught in the sieve were bagged and labeled. Even the sand that passed through the sieve was saved and driven back to a lab at the museum, where I would later find three other students picking through it with magnifying glasses and tweezers, searching for tinier stuff  —   rodent teeth,   spines  —   while listening to “Call Me Maybe. ” To an outsider, it looked preposterous. The archaeologists were cataloging and storing absolutely everything, treating this physical material as though it were digital information  —   JPEGs of itself. And yet they couldn’t afford not to: Everything a Neanderthal came into contact with was a valuable clue. (In 28 years of excavations here, archaeologists have yet to find a fossil of an actual Neanderthal.) “This is like putting together a   jigsaw puzzle where you only have five pieces,” Finlayson said. He somehow made this analogy sound exciting instead of hopeless. By that point, the enormousness of what they didn’t know  —   what they could never know  —   had become a distraction for me. One of the dig’s lead archaeologists, Richard Jennings of Liverpool John Moores University, listed the many items they had found around that hearth. “And this is literally just from two squares!” he said. (A “square,” in archaeology, is one meter by one meter sites are divided into grids of squares.) Then Jennings waved wordlessly at the rest of the   cave. Look at the big picture, he was saying imagine what else we’ll find! There was also Vanguard Cave next door, an even more promising site, because while Gorham’s had been partly excavated by less meticulous scientists in the 1940s and ’50s, Finlayson’s team was the first to touch Vanguard. Already they had uncovered a layer of perfectly preserved mud there. (“We suspect, if there’s a place where you’re going to find the first Neanderthal footprint, it will be here,” Finlayson said.) The “resolution” of the caves was incredible the wind blew sand in so fast that it preserved short periods, faithfully, like entries in a diary. Finlayson has described it as “the longest and most detailed record of [Neanderthals’] way of life that is currently available. ” This was the good news. And yet there were more than 20 other nearby caves that the Gibraltar Neanderthals might have used, and they were now underwater, behind us. When sea levels rose around 20, 000 years ago, the Mediterranean drowned them. It also drowned the wooded savanna between Gorham’s and the former coastline  —   where, presumably, the Neanderthals had spent an even larger share of their lives and left even more artifacts. So yes, Jennings was right: There was a lot of cave left to dig through. But it was like looking for needles in a haystack, and the entire haystack was merely the one needle they had managed to find in an astronomically larger haystack. And most of that haystack was now inaccessible forever. I could tell it wasn’t productive to dwell on the problem at this scale, while picking   husks from the hearth, but there it was. “Look, you can almost see what’s happening,” Finlayson eventually said. “The fire and the charcoal, the embers scattering. ” It was true. If you followed that stratum of sand away from the hearth, you could see, embedded in the wall behind us, black flecks where the smoke and cinders from this fire had blown. Suddenly, it struck me  —   though it should have earlier  —   that what we were looking at were the remnants of a single event: a specific fire, on a specific night, made by specific Neanderthals. Maybe this won’t sound that profound, but it snapped that prehistoric abstraction into focus. This wasn’t just a “hearth,” I realized it was a campfire. Finlayson began narrating the scene for me. A few Neanderthals cooked the ibex they had hunted and the mussels and nuts they had foraged and then, after dinner, made some tools around the fire. After they went to sleep and the fire died out, a hyena slinked in to scavenge scraps from the ashes and took a poop. Then  —   perhaps that same night  —   the wind picked up and covered everything with the fine layer of sand that these students were now brushing away. While we stood talking, one of the women uncovered a small flint ax, called a Levallois flake. After 50, 000 years, the edge was still sharp. They let me touch it. One of the earliest authorities on Neanderthals was a Frenchman named Marcellin Boule. A lot of what he said was wrong. In 1911, Boule began publishing his analysis of the first nearly complete Neanderthal skeleton ever discovered, which he named Old Man of La Chapelle, after the limestone cave where it was found. Laboring to reconstruct the Old Man’s anatomy, he deduced that its head must have been slouched forward, its spine hunched and its toes spread like an ape’s. Then, having reassembled the Neanderthal this way, Boule insulted it. This “brutish” and “clumsy” posture, he wrote, clearly indicated a lack of morals and a lifestyle dominated by “functions of a purely vegetative or bestial kind. ” A colleague of Boule’s went further, claiming that Neanderthals usually walked on all fours and never laughed: “  had no smile. ” Boule was part of a movement trying to reconcile natural selection with religion by portraying Neanderthals as closer to animals than to us, he could protect the ideal of a separate, immaculate human lineage. When he consulted with an artist to make a rendering of the Neanderthal, it came out looking like a furry, mean gorilla. Neanderthal fossils kept surfacing in Europe, and scholars like Boule were scrambling to make sense of them, improvising what would later grow into a new interdisciplinary field, now known as paleoanthropology. The evolution of that science was haphazard and often comically unscientific. An exhaustive history by Erik Trinkaus and Pat Shipman describes how Neanderthals became “mirrors that reflected, in all their awfulness and awesomeness, the nature and humanity of those who touched them. ” That included a lot of human blundering. It became clear only in 1957, for example  —   46 years after Boule, and after several   of the Old Man’s skeleton  —   that Boule’s particular Neanderthal, which led him to imagine all Neanderthals as   oafs, actually just had several deforming injuries and severe osteoarthritis. Still, Boule’s influence was  . Over the years, his ideologically tainted image of Neanderthals was often refracted through the lens of other ideologies, occasionally racist ones. In 1930, the prominent British anthropologist Sir Arthur Keith, writing in The New York Times, channeled Boule’s work to justify colonialism. For Keith, the replacement of an ancient, inferior species like Neanderthals by newer, heartier Homo sapiens proved that Britain’s actions in Australia  —   “The white man . .. replacing the most ancient type of brown man known to us”  —   was part of a natural order that had been operating for millenniums. It’s easy to get snooty about all this unenlightened paleoanthropology of the past. But all sciences operate by trying to fit new data into existing theories. And this particular science, for which the “data” has always consisted of scant and somewhat inscrutable bits of rock and fossil, often has to lean on those   even more heavily. “Assumptions, theories, expectations,” the University of Barcelona archaeologist João Zilhão says, “all must come into play a lot, because you are interpreting data that do not speak for themselves. ” Imagine, for example, working in a cave without any skulls or other easily distinguishable fossils and trying to figure out if you’re looking at a Neanderthal settlement or a more recent, modern human one. In the past, scientists might turn to the surrounding artifacts, interpreting more   tools as evidence of Neanderthals and more   tools as evidence of early modern humans. But working that way, it’s easy to miss evidence of Neanderthals’ resemblance to us, because, as soon as you see it, you assume they were us. So many techniques similarly hinge on interpretation and judgment, even perfectly   ones, like “morphometric analysis”  —   identifying fossils as belonging to one species rather than another by comparing particular parts of their anatomy  —   and radiocarbon dating. How the material to be dated is sampled and how results are calibrated are susceptible to drastic revision and bitter disagreement. (What’s more, because of an infuriating quirk of physics, the effectiveness of radiocarbon dating happens to break down around 40, 000 years ago  —   right around the time of the Neanderthal extinction. One of our best tools for looking into the past becomes unreliable at exactly the moment we’re most interested in examining.) Ultimately, a bottomless relativism can creep in: tenuous interpretations held up by webs of other interpretations, each strung from still more interpretations. Almost every archaeologist I interviewed complained that the field has become “overinterpreted”  —   that the ratio of physical evidence to speculation about that evidence is out of whack. Good stories can generate their own momentum. Starting in the 1920s, older and more exciting hominid fossils, like Homo erectus, began surfacing in Africa and Asia, and the field soon shifted its focus there. The Washington University anthropologist Erik Trinkaus, who began his career in the early ’70s, told me, “When I started working on Neanderthals, nobody really cared about them. ” The liveliest question about Neanderthals was still the first one: Were they our direct ancestors or the endpoint of a separate evolutionary track? Scientists called this question “the Neanderthal Problem. ” Some of the theories worked up to answer it encouraged different visions of Neanderthal intelligence and behavior. The “Multiregional Model,” for example, which had us descending from Neanderthals, was more inclined to see them as capable, sympathetic and fundamentally human the opposing “Out of Africa” hypothesis, which held that we moved in and replaced them, cast them as comparatively inferior. For decades, when evidence of a more advanced Neanderthal way of life turned up, it was often explained away, or mobbed by enough contrary or undermining interpretations that, over time, it never found real purchase. Some findings broke through more than others, however, like the discovery of what was essentially a small Neanderthal cemetery, in Shanidar Cave, in what is now Iraqi Kurdistan. There had been many compelling instances of Neanderthals’ burying their dead, but Shanidar was harder to ignore, especially after soil samples revealed the presence of huge amounts of pollen. This was interpreted as the remains of a funerary floral arrangement. An archaeologist at the center of this work, Ralph Solecki, published a book called “Shanidar: The First Flower People. ” It was 1971  —   the Age of Aquarius. Those flowers, he’d go on to write, proved that Neanderthals “had ‘soul. ’’u2009” Then again, Solecki’s idea was eventually discredited. In 1999, a more thorough analysis of the Shanidar grave site found that Neanderthals almost certainly did not leave flowers there. The pollen had been tracked in, thousands of years later, by burrowing,   rodents. (That said, even a   later, there are still paleoanthropologists at work on this question. It might not have been gerbils it may have been bees.) As more supposed anomalies surfaced, they became harder to brush off. In 1996, the paleoanthropologist   Hublin and others used CT scanning technology to   a bone fragment found in a French cave decades earlier, alongside a raft of advanced tools and artifacts, associated with the   Châtelperronian industry, which archaeologists always presumed was the work of early modern humans. Now Hublin’s analysis identified the bone as belonging to a Neanderthal. But rather than reascribe the Châtelperronian industry to Neanderthals, Hublin chalked up his findings to “acculturation”: Surely the Neanderthals must have learned how to make this stuff by watching us. “To me,” says Zilhão, the University of Barcelona archaeologist, “there was a logical shock: If the paradigm forces you to say something like this, there must be something wrong with the paradigm. ” Zilhão published a stinging critique challenging the field to shake off its “  prejudice. ” Papers were fired back and forth, igniting what Zilhão calls “a   war” and counting. Then, in the middle of that war, geneticists shook up the paradigm completely. A group at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany, led by Svante Paabo, had been assembling a draft sequence of a Neanderthal genome, using DNA recovered from bones. Their findings were published in 2010. It had already become clear by then that Homo sapiens and Neanderthals appeared in Eurasia separately  —   “Out of Africa was essentially right”  —   but Paabo’s work revealed that before the Neanderthals disappeared, the two groups mated. Even today, 40, 000 years after our gene pools stopped mixing, most living humans still carry Neanderthal DNA, making up roughly 1 to 2 percent of our total genomes. The data shows that we also apparently bred with other hominids, like the Denisovans, about which very little is known. It was staggering even Paabo couldn’t bring himself to believe it at first. But the results were the results, and they carried a sort of empirical magnetism that archaeological evidence lacks. “Geneticists are much more powerful, numerous and incomparably better funded than anyone else dealing with this stuff,” Zilhão said. He joked: “Their aura is kind of miraculous. It’s a bit like receiving the Ten Commandments from God. ” Paabo’s work, and a continuing wave of genomic research, has provided clarity but also complexity, recasting our oppositional,   relationship into something more communal and collaborative  —   and perhaps not just on the genetic level. The extent of the interbreeding supported previous speculation, by a minority of paleoanthropologists, that there might have been cases of Neanderthals and modern humans living alongside each other, intermeshed, for centuries, and that generations of their offspring had found places in those communities, too. Then again, it’s also possible that some of the interbreeding was forced. Paabo now recommends against imagining separate species of human evolution altogether: not an Us and a Them, but one enormous “metapopulation” composed of shifting clusters of essentially   things that periodically coincided in time and space and, when they happened to bump into one another, occasionally had sex. Lunch happened at the mouth of Gorham’s Cave, out in the sun. I ate a sandwich on a log, facing the sea, alongside Jennings and a few of his Liverpool students, while the young men and women from Spain mingled behind us, laughing and stretching and helping one another crack their backs. The language barrier seemed to discourage the two cohorts from talking much. And yet the students lived together during the excavation and had somehow achieved a muffled camaraderie. Even Jennings and his counterpart, José María Gutiérrez López, a veteran archaeologist from a museum in Cádiz, had a somewhat similar dynamic, despite working closely together for many summers at Gorham’s. Neither was terribly fluent in the other’s language, but their silence, by this point, seemed warm and knowing. Waiting for our ride at the end of one workday, I noticed them staring at a plastic bag snagged in the concertina wire above an old military gate. The bag had been there for a long, long time, Jennings told me. Then he turned and uttered, “Cinco años?” Gutiérrez López smiled. “Sí,” he said, nodding. I, meanwhile, felt compelled to test out all of this as a model for   relations. That contact obsessed me: What would it have been like to look out over a grassy plain and watch parallel humanity pass by? Scientists often turn to historical first contacts as frames of reference, like the arrival of Europeans among Native Americans, or Captain Cook landing in Australia  —   largely histories of violence and subjugation. But as Zilhão points out, typically one of those two cultures set out to conquer the other. “Those people were conscious that they’d come from somewhere else,” he told me. “They were a product of a civilization that had books, that had studied their past. ” Homo sapiens encountering Neanderthals would have been different: They met uncoupled from politics and history neither identified as part of a network of millions of supposedly more advanced people. And so, as Finlayson put it to me: “Each valley could have told a different story. In one, they may have hit each other over the head. In another, they may have made love. In another, they ignored each other. ” It’s a kind of coexistence that our modern imaginations may no longer be sensitive enough to envision. So much of our identity as a species is tied up in our anomalousness, in our dominion over others. But that narcissistic   is an exceedingly recent privilege. (“Outside the world of Tolkienesque fantasy literature, we tend to think that it is normal for there to be just one human species on Earth at a time,” the writers Dimitra Papagianni and Michael A. Morse explain. “The past 20 or 30 millennia, however, have been the exception. ”) Now, eating lunch, I considered that the   of humans and Neanderthals hadn’t been so trippy or profound after all. Maybe it looked as mundane as this: two groups, lingering on a beach, only sort of acknowledging each other. Maybe the many millenniums during which we shared Eurasia was, much of the time, like a superlong elevator ride with strangers. Some paleoanthropologists are starting to reimagine the extinction of Neanderthals as equally prosaic: not the culmination of some epic clash of civilizations but an aggregate result of a long, ecological muddle. Strictly speaking, extinction is what happens after a species fails to maintain a higher proportion of births to deaths  —   it’s a numbers game. And so the real competition between Neanderthals and early modern humans wasn’t localized quarrels for food or territory but a quiet,   demographic marathon: each species repopulating itself, until one fell so far behind that it vanished. And we had a big head start. “When modern humans came,” notes Chris Stringer, a paleoanthropologist at Britain’s Natural History Museum, “there just weren’t that many Neanderthals around. ” For millenniums, some scientists believe, before modern humans poured in from Africa, the climate in Europe was exceptionally unstable. The landscape kept flipping between temperate forest and cold, treeless steppe. The fauna that Neanderthals subsisted on kept migrating away, faster than they could. Though Neanderthals survived this turbulence, they were never able to build up their numbers. (Across all of Eurasia, at any point in history, says John Hawks, an anthropologist at the University of   “there probably weren’t enough of them to fill an N. F. L. stadium. ”) With the demographics so skewed, Stringer went on, even the slightest modern human advantage would be amplified tremendously: a single innovation, something like sewing needles, might protect just enough babies from the elements to lower the infant mortality rate and allow modern humans to conclusively overtake the Neanderthals. And yet Stringer is careful not to conflate innovation with superior intelligence. Innovation, too, can be a function of population size. “We live in an age where information, where good ideas, spread like wildfire, and we build on them,” Stringer told me. “But it wasn’t like that 50, 000 years ago. ” The more members your species has, the more likely one member will stumble on a useful new technology  —   and that, once stumbled upon, the innovation will spread you need sufficient human tinder for those sparks of culture to catch. “There was nothing inevitable about modern human success,” Stringer says. “It was luck. ” We didn’t defeat the Neanderthals we just swamped them. Trinkaus compares it to how European wildcats are currently disappearing, absorbed into much larger populations of house cats gone feral. It wasn’t a flattering analogy  —   we are the house cats  —   but that was Trinkaus’s point: “I think a lot of this is basically banal,” he says. Showing me around the Gibraltar Museum one morning, Finlayson described the petering out of Neanderthals on the Rock with unnerving pathos. Gibraltar, with its comparatively stable climate, would have been one of their last refuges, he explained, and he likened the population there to critically endangered species today, like snow leopards or imperiled butterflies: living relics carrying on in small, fragmented populations long after they’ve passed a genetic point of no return. “They became a ghost species,” Finlayson said. We happened to be standing in front of two Neanderthals, exquisitely lifelike sculptures the museum unveiled last spring, on a sweep of sand in their own austere gallery. They were scientific reconstructions, extrapolated by artists from casts of actual fossils. (These two were based on the only Neanderthal skulls ever recovered in Gibraltar: that first woman’s skull, sent to George Busk in 1864, and another, of a child, unearthed in 1926.) They were called Nana and Flint. Finlayson’s wife, Geraldine, and son, Stewart  —   both scientists who work closely with him at the museum  —   had helped him come up with the names. The boy had his arms thrown around Nana’s waist, his cheek on her thigh. He was   himself behind her leg, as kids do, but also stared out, straight at us, slightly alarmed, or helpless. “I don’t get tired of looking at them,” Finlayson said. He had commissioned the Neanderthals from Dutch artists known as Kennis  Kennis, and he was initially taken aback by the woman’s posture in their sketches. She stood oddly, with her arms crossed in front of her chest, resting on opposite shoulders, as if she were  . But Kennis  Kennis barraged him with ethnographic photos: real   people standing just like this, or even more strangely, their hands behind their necks or slung over their heads. As it happens, the artists had an intense personal interest in where human beings leave their hands when they don’t have pockets. I’d never thought about this before  —   I’ve always had pockets  —   and I wondered if artists might expose these perceptual bubbles more pointedly than archaeologists. Kennis  Kennis appeared to be major players in the tiny field of Paleolithic reconstruction. Scientists who had worked with them encouraged me to seek them out. “They’re great people,” one archaeologist told me. “Hyperactive. Like rubber balls. ” The Kennis brothers, Adrie and Alfons, are each 50 years old: identical twins. They are sturdy, attractive men, with dark, wildly swirling hair, and live in the small Dutch city of Arnhem, southeast of Amsterdam. When I arrived at Adrie’s house last summer, I found Alfons at the end of the driveway, glasses sliding down his nose, carefully filling a crack in the robin’   butt cheek of a silicon Neanderthal mold. Kennis  Kennis had gradually   Adrie’s house as a second studio. Most of their work and materials were here:   headless bodies of various human species and a wall of shelves filled with skulls and heads. The heads were frighteningly realistic, with glass eyes and fleshy faces that begged to be touched. When the brothers fly around Europe to pitch to museums, they take these heads with them, like salesmen’s samples. “On the airplane! We have heads!” Adrie shouted. “They scan things!” Alfons shouted. And slowly I understood: The brothers thought it was hilarious that airport security never questioned them about their duffel bags full of heads. “I never have to open my bags!” Adrie said, then he scampered to the wall, where a particular head had caught his eye: very   with a rough, bushy beard and rawness in its upper lip  —   a reconstruction of a primitive Homo sapiens skull found in Morocco. Adrie held the head in his palm and hollered, “Bowling!” while pretending to bowl with it. Then he laughed and laughed and laughed. That was how it went for the rest of the day. They spoke in a bifurcated riot, seldom finishing sentences, just skipping ahead once they had spit out the key words. And if a thought escaped them or their English faltered, they didn’t go silent instead, they repeated the last word, or made a strange guttural drone, as if thrusting some heavy weight over their heads, to fill the space. Their first big commission came in 2006, for the Neanderthal Museum, on the site of Neander Valley. It emerged as a jovial,   old man, with woefulness, or maybe just exhaustion, behind his eyes. That jolt of Neanderthal individuality has been a trademark of their work ever since. It elevates Neanderthals out of a single homogeneous abstraction and endows them with personhood. (At one point, Adrie described watching a neighbor spend an entire day   each brick of his driveway. He had an epiphany: “All the types of people around us, there must have been Neanderthals just like them. ” Alfons added: “Neanderthal neat freaks! Neanderthal Bill Gates! ”) What the brothers want, they told me, is for the viewer to catch herself relating to the Neanderthal  —   to recognize, in a visceral way, that Neanderthals sit at the fragile edge of our own identities. To feel that, Adrie explained, “they need to look you in the eye. ” They were obsessed  —   the only word for it  —   and have been since age 7, when Alfons found a picture of a Neanderthal skeleton in a book, and it instantly possessed them both. They spent a lot of time at their parents’ restaurant, after school and on weekends: With nothing to do, they started drawing Neanderthals. They drew feverishly, combatively, each brother keenly aware of whose rib cage looked brawnier, who had rendered more beautiful shadows on his Neanderthal’s upper lip. “We were both the dumbest guys in the whole school!” Alfons said. “We couldn’t count!” Drawing was all they knew how to do. As young men, they tried to teach art but couldn’t find steady employment. Their family told them to give up their crazy preoccupation. They wouldn’t. They made art at night and took custodial jobs at a psychiatric hospital. They organized the Christmas talent show and played   with the residents. Initially they were painters, not sculptors. They made   reconstructions only to have lifelike models to paint: They were that meticulous, that fixated on knowing how the musculature of a Neanderthal hung off its skeleton. Because they had to produce a   individual, the brothers were forced to make decisions about what paleoanthropologists had the luxury of describing as spectra of variation. Geneticists can suggest a probable scope of skin and hair colors. But the brothers must imagine the wear on a particular Neanderthal’s skin after a hard life outside, or the abuse his toenails would take. And would Neanderthals wear ponytails? Would they shear their bangs away, to get their hair out of their faces? “Every culture does something with their hair!” Alfons insisted. “There’s no culture that does nothing with their hair. ” This uncorked a frantic seminar on known global hairstyles of the last several thousand years. They began pulling up photos on Adrie’s laptop, dozens of them, from anthropological archives or stills from old ethnographic films. These were some of the same photos they had shown Finlayson. The brothers had pored over them for years but still gasped or bellowed now as each new, improbable human form materialized. The pictures showed a panorama of divergent body types and grooming: spiky eyebrows astonishingly asymmetrical breasts a towering aboriginal man with the chiseled torso of an American underwear model, but two twigs for legs a Hottentot woman with an extraordinarily convex rear end. “People would never let us make buttocks like this!” Alfons said regretfully. “All this variation! It’s beautiful!” shouted Adrie, refusing to look away from the screen. He had to look: These were reaches of reality that our minds didn’t travel to on their own. “If you live in the West, you’d never imagine,” he went on. The brothers’ delight seemed to come from feeling all these superficial differences quiver against a profound,   sameness. Finally, Adrie turned to me and said very seriously, “These are all Homo sapiens. ” They showed me more photos. “It’s real, it’s real, it’s real!” Alfons kept shouting. Adrie said, “Unimaginable, unimaginable, unimaginable!” It only registered later: I had spent the day with identical twins who, since childhood, have been stupefied by how different human beings can be. At the rear of Gorham’s Cave, past the hearth the team was excavating, there was a tall metal staircase. It led up to a long catwalk, which led to a locked steel gate. I waited there one morning while Finlayson fumbled around in his pocket. Then he turned his key. The excavation had worked through this narrowed rear chamber of the cave years earlier and discovered, at the end of the 2012 season, an engraving on the floor: a crosshatched pattern of 13 grooves in the bedrock. A tide of specialists flowed into Gorham’s. They determined that the engraving was made at least 39, 000 years ago and ruled out its having been created inadvertently  —   left over after skinning an animal, say. In controlled experiments, it took between 188 and 317 strokes with a flint tool to create the entire figure. “What we’ve always said,” Finlayson explained, “is it’s intentional and it’s not functional. You can call that art, if you like. ” The finding was published in The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences in 2014. The news media called the engraving “the hashtag. ” One scientist described the elaborate crosshatch as watershed evidence of Neanderthals’ capacity for “complex symbolic thought” and “abstract expression. ” But several archaeologists told me they believe that there are many clearer signs of Neanderthals’ capacity for complex cognition and symbolism, including a discovery in Southern France last year that seemed to dwarf the hashtag’s significance. (More than 1, 000 feet into the Bruniquel Cave, Neanderthals assembled two rings of 400 deliberately broken stalagmites, with other material piled and propped around it  —   like a labyrinth, or a shrine.) But Finlayson was undaunted. He turned the hashtag into a logo for the   rebranding of his museum. There was a hashtag decal on the van he picked me up in every morning. We stood and talked for a while until, finally, with Richard   aplomb, Finlayson lifted a tarp and showed it to me. It did not make a tremendous impact at first  —   it was lines in rock. But Finlayson went on, pointing to a spot near the entrance to this isolated anteroom, a few feet across from the engraving, where the team had excavated another hearth. Neanderthals built fires in that exact spot, on and off, for 8, 000 years, he said  —   until their disappearance from Gibraltar. But few animal bones were recovered here it wasn’t a place they cooked. And the location of the fire was also puzzling: Neanderthals usually situated fires at the fronts of caves, to control smoke. And yet, Finlayson explained, “if you look up, this has a natural chimney. ” We flung our heads back: A chute coursed through the high, craggy ceiling above us. It seemed, Finlayson explained, that the Neanderthals did their butchering and cooking at the front of Gorham’s, then retired here at night. Lighting a fire at this hearth would block the narrowest point in the cave, sealing off this chamber from predators. You could hang out here, Finlayson said, “have a   snack or something,” then head to bed. “See there?” he said, motioning to a smaller opening to our right. It led to a second room, similar to this one. “This,” Finlayson said, “is the bedroom. ” I looked again at the hashtag. It wasn’t on the cave floor, exactly, as it was usually described, but on a broad ledge, a foot or two off the ground. It made for a perfect bench, and it was suddenly easy to imagine a Neanderthal sitting on it, in ideal proximity to the fire. For all I knew, the hashtag marked his or her favorite seat. But Finlayson wasn’t done. After the Neanderthal artifacts disappear from Gorham’s sediment layers, there’s a gap of many thousand years  —   a thick stack of empty sand. Then other artifacts appear: Modern humans occupied the cave and built a fire here, too, just a couple of feet from the Neanderthals’ hearth. They used the bedroom annex as well. They left a cave painting on the wall in there: a gorgeous red stag, indisputably recognizable to us  —   their descendants  —   as art. Another 18, 000 years passed, give or take. The Phoenicians came. And they left offerings back here there were shards of their ceramics under the catwalk we had just crossed. Then, 2, 000 years after that, in 1907, a certain Captain A. Gorham of Britain’s Second Battalion Royal Munster Fusiliers arrived. Gorham didn’t discover Gorham’s Cave, Finlayson told me it had always been impossible to miss. “That’s what he found,” Finlayson said. “That’s really Gorham’s Cave. ” He pointed to the bedroom, and we both turned, bathing it with our headlamps. Beside the entrance was written, in big block letters, GORHAM’S CAVE 1907, with a chunky black arrow pointing to the doorway. Gorham had written his name directly over the spot where, some 39, 000 years earlier, a Neanderthal had made his or her own mark. The full sweep and synchronicity of this history hadn’t seemed to occur to Finlayson before. Hesitantly, he said, “Maybe there are special places in the world that have universal human appeal. ” I felt a similar, uncanny rush when I noticed that, at some point while he talked, we had each instinctually taken a seat on the rock ledge, next to the hashtag, and were now sitting side by side, staring into space where the two ancient campfires once burned. It’s not an especially spiritual experience when one human being walks into another human being’s kitchen for the first time and simply knows where the silverware drawer is. At the back of Gorham’s, though, that intuition was spread across two distinct kinds of humans and tens of thousands of years. Ultimately, why we are here and the Neanderthals are not can no longer be explained in a way that implies that our existence is particularly meaningful or secure. But at least moments like this placed our existence inside some longer,    continuity. It was the day of the Brexit vote. After   from the cave with Finlayson, I would spend the rest of the afternoon rejiggering my travel plans in a mild panic, trying to catch a ride out of Gibraltar and into Spain that night, so that if the Spanish exacted a retaliatory   after the results were announced, I could still make my flight home from Malaga the next day. I won’t describe the scenes I saw that morning  —   the blankness on people’s faces at the airport, phone calls I overheard  —   except to say that when I woke up on Nov. 9, after our own election, I felt equipped with at least a faint frame of reference. Reality seemed heightened and a little dangerous, because for so many people, including me, it had broken away from our expectations. We had misunderstood the present in the same way archaeologists can misunderstand the past. What was possible was suddenly exposed as grossly insufficient, because, to borrow Finlayson’s metaphor, we never imagined that the few jigsaw puzzle pieces we based it on constituted such a tiny part of the whole. Even some on the winning sides seemed similarly stunned and adrift. Many, though, just felt vindicated. Later that summer, I came across an essay for a British weekly by the actress Elizabeth Hurley, a fervent Leave supporter, who was now doubling down. “Knock yourselves out calling us   Neanderthals,” she wrote, “and spit a bit more venom and vitriol our way. You are showing yourselves in all your meanspirited,   elitist glory. ” When I read that, I took genuine umbrage  —   but on the Neanderthals’ behalf. And while I hate to admit it, I also felt a cheap but delicious tingle of smugness, because I now knew that “Neanderthal” wasn’t the insult Hurley thought it was  —   though this, I simultaneously realized, also closed a certain   loop and promoted, in me, the very   elitist glory Hurley was incensed by, thus deepening the divide. It was dizzying and sad and maybe inevitably human, but still no help to us at all.

2 - ESCADA, Brazil  —   Not a soul was in sight on the narrow dusty street, except for a cat skittering under a   moon. It was 2:30 a. m. and in a small pink house up 29 steps carved jaggedly into a red clay embankment, Vera Lúcia da Silva was readying her baby for a journey to the city of Recife, two and a half hours away. Cradling Sophia Valentina, she walked through the   town, then climbed into a government van for the jostling ride, arriving just after sunrise. They make the arduous trip several times a week. It is the only way to get the treatment and therapy Sophia needs for an ominous array of problems caused by the Zika virus. Now more than a year old, Sophia is a child of the Zika epidemic, one of nearly 2, 500 babies in Brazil born to infected mothers, with brain damage so profound the consequences are only beginning to be understood. Thirteen months after the World Health Organization declared Zika a global health emergency, some of the public alarm over the   virus that swept through Latin America is receding. In November, the W. H. O. lifted its emergency designation, but Zika has hardly disappeared. Thousands of new Zika infections continue to be reported throughout Latin America, and W. H. O. officials said that their action simply signals that, like malaria or yellow fever, Zika is a continuing threat in the region rather than an urgent pandemic. For families of Zika babies, however, the disastrous effects are only deepening. That is especially true in the impoverished cities and villages of northeastern Brazil, where the connection between the mysterious virus and infants born with tiny misshapen heads was first detected and where hundreds of families are struggling to give these babies the best lives possible. Family relationships have been upended, precarious livelihoods shattered. Some parents have had to leave jobs to devote themselves to their child’s care. High rates of teenage pregnancy in Brazil add another layer of hardship, as adolescents with braces on their teeth and homework to finish find themselves the mothers of afflicted infants. And doctors and researchers are just starting to grasp the medical consequences of Zika. Besides the alarmingly small heads characteristic of microcephaly, many babies have a long list of varied symptoms, leading experts to rename their condition “congenital Zika syndrome. ” They can have seizures, breathing problems, trouble swallowing, weakness and stiffness in muscles and joints preventing them from even lifting their heads, clubbed feet, vision and hearing problems, and ferocious irritability. Some have passed their first birthdays, but have neurological development closer to that of    infants, doctors say. Some microcephaly cases appear so dire that experts liken them to a previously rare variant called “fetal brain disruption sequence. ” And new issues keep cropping up, including hydrocephalus, excess fluid in the brain. Now, new waves of impaired children, who appeared normal at birth, are being identified. For some, microcephaly and other symptoms are emerging months later, as their brains, with malformations or debilitated or destroyed cells, fail to develop enough to match their physical growth. Experts predict there will be more children who still seem unaffected, but whose problems will surface in toddlerhood or their school years. Doctors don’t yet know the extent of the disease, said Dr. Vanessa Van der Linden, a neuropediatrician in Recife who helped discover the link between Zika and microcephaly. “We only know what’s easy to see. ” Dr. Van der Linden is one of scores of devoted doctors and therapists helping families at public and nonprofit hospitals and clinics. Brazil’s government is drawing on its overstretched resources, including providing modest disability payments to poor families. Many families are on waiting lists for services. Therapy programs sometimes drop children because their development is too stunted for therapy to help any further. For older babies who still cannot make eye contact or interact, Dr. Van der Linden said, “if you did physical therapy every day, it doesn’t mean they will be better. ” For Zika families, the difficulties are only beginning. The children are still small enough to be held, fed and carried. But ultimately, many may be unable to walk, attend regular schools, or live on their own as adults. “These babies, most of them or all of them, they’re going to live very long lives, you can keep them alive a long time, and they will need assistance from someone 24 hours a day,” said Dr. Ernesto Marques, an infectious disease expert at the University of Pittsburgh and the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation in Recife. “The consequences to the society are huge. ” These are the stories of three families: a couple persevering with ingenuity and grit despite their baby’s frequent medical setbacks a girl who became a Zika mother at 14, forcing her to mature well beyond her years newlyweds whose relationship could not withstand the pressures of caring for their disabled baby. “Grave risk of aspiration,” read the piece of paper near the bed where Ms. da Silva was wrapping Sophia in a pink hooded fleece for their     walk to the van. A doctor had explained what that medical report meant. “She is going to choke,” Ms. da Silva said, twisting her fingers anxiously. “Food is going to go to her lungs. ” Sophia had serious dysphagia, swallowing problems afflicting older Zika babies whose brains cannot coordinate skills for eating. Doctors advised adding thickener to her formula, but if unsuccessful, she would need a feeding tube threaded through her nose. A previous feeding tube had caused Sophia to vomit black blood. “I am asking God that she will not have to use the feeding tube,” Ms. da Silva, 32, implored, as outside, roosters crowed in the darkness and dogs barked like town criers. Her husband, Ronaldo, 34, tried to reassure her. “God,” he said, “would never give us 100 kilos if we could only carry 50 kilos. ” But the weight keeps piling on. After another    van ride to Recife and hours of waiting on hard plastic chairs, Sophia, in a ruffled top with pink hearts and “Love” spelled in rhinestones, was placed on an elevated mat at the Altino Ventura Foundation clinic. Five therapists examined her. One shook a yellow rattle by her ear. Another removed Sophia’s tiny lavender eyeglasses, waved a shiny silver pompom and flickered a flashlight, but her eyes seemed barely able to follow the stimuli. “Sophia is a child with very compromised visual, auditory and motor skills,” concluded Kyrla Melo, a physical therapist. “She has no head control, she does not roll over, she does not sit. ” Already, another clinic had discharged Sophia from its physical therapy group. “The doctor said Sophia was not developing,” Ms. da Silva said. “Children who are not developing are getting dropped from the therapies. ” She was upset. “I think it is very wrong. Their duty was to work so our babies would develop. ” Sophia’s parents provide any support they can. They fashioned homemade versions of the physical therapy equipment clinics use: They made rattles of Coke bottles filled with beans they placed colorful plastic balls in a tiny inflatable pool they stuffed a pair of Mr. da Silva’s jeans with plastic foam, to prop Sophia into a sitting position. A doctor told them bright colors might stimulate Sophia’s vision, so they painted their gray door and shutters pumpkin orange, changed curtains and sofa covers to cherry red, and draped sunny yellow fabric in the kitchen. Resourcefulness is second nature to them. Before they married, Mr. da Silva, who works painting oil refinery pipes, spent a year of evenings   and leveling a plot atop a cliff strewn with scraggly plants, preparing ground for their house, with its corrugated red tile roof and laundry lines spangling the sides. The cliff borders one side of a narrow cobblestone street. On the other side, houses are at or below ground level, with barred windows to deter thieves and drug dealers. After their first child, Richarlisson, was born, Ms. da Silva, a former teacher, tried five years for another pregnancy, losing one to miscarriage. At three months pregnant with Sophia, near a neighbor’s well, a mosquito bit her arm. She developed diarrhea and a rash on her arm, belly and face. A doctor said it could be chikungunya, a   illness that seldom has lasting effects and is not transmitted to a fetus. Zika, carried by the same mosquito, was barely known in Brazil then. Things seemed fine until a   ultrasound. “Your daughter has microcephaly,” a doctor told Ms. da Silva. “A smaller head, and the child’s brain has not developed. ” Ms. da Silva despaired. Still, two weeks later, when a doctor said, “If you don’t want a child with microcephaly, you are not obligated to have it,” she rejected abortion. “No, even if she has microcephaly, I am going to love her the way she comes,” she said. At birth, Sophia’s left leg hooked across her body and a doctor announced, “Sophia Valentina is not going to walk. ” Ms. da Silva got angry. “You think you know more than God, huh?” she chastised the doctor. “My daughter is not even 24 hours old. ” Using baths to relax the leg and gently manipulating it in a cloth diaper sling, Ms. da Silva and her sister coaxed it into normal position. Another doctor said Sophia’s hands were “not going to hold anything” the da Silvas trained her fingers to grasp lollipops and shake rattles. When neighbors gossiped, one saying Sophia had “a deformed head and a crippled leg,” Mr. da Silva talked his wife out of confronting them. Some people are kind, he said, like his boss, who kept him on when difficulties forced the company to lay off all but seven of 300 employees. Still, Ms. da Silva spent five months arguing with city officials who kept denying her government van rides to Recife. She called one employee “Satan,” and finally landed a seat after threatening to alert a newspaper and embarrass the mayor in an election year. But whenever Sophia’s doctors schedule new appointments, Ms. da Silva must walk 40 minutes to reserve a van seat in person with the health department during certain hours. They sometimes miss previously scheduled appointments to reserve a van for another appointment. One morning, Sophia stopped moving. She was breathing, her eyes were open, but her body seemed frozen. Ms. da Silva wept, “afraid of losing my little doll. ” Sophia was weak and undernourished because she had not adapted to the nasal feeding tube inserted two weeks earlier. Doctors said she would need a new tube every 15 days. The next month, November, Sophia was hospitalized for 10 days for pneumonia. In December, a shunt was inserted in her brain, which had filled with excess fluid, causing 32 seizures in one day. January brought another hospitalization for pneumonia. Sophia, now 14 months old, is on a waiting list for an abdominal feeding tube. “My daughter is a warrior,” Mr. da Silva said. On the red sofa behind the orange shutters, Ms. da Silva gazed in anguished wonder at her baby girl. “Sophia Valentina,” she murmured. “She is going to surprise me. ” Alícia Isabela do Nascimento Martins was born two months premature, delivered by emergency cesarean section. She was hospitalized for 70 days, until her lungs could breathe on their own, her heart could beat steadily, and her body no longer needed a feeding tube. But doctors could not fix the brain damage she suffered when her mother was infected with Zika during pregnancy. Alícia, now nearly 18 months old, has microcephaly, rigid muscles, seizures, and problems with vision, breathing and swallowing. Raising such a baby would challenge anyone, but Alícia’s mother, Íris Adriane do Nascimento Santos, is practically a child herself. She gave birth at 14. Nearly 450 teenagers have given birth to babies with microcephaly in Brazil’s epidemic, Health Ministry officials said. Some juggle school with caring for these infants. Some rely on their parents. “I never imagined that situation,” Íris said, braces on her teeth glinting as she struggled to quiet Alícia with one of her only successful methods, repeatedly playing a musical cartoon on her cellphone. “This feeling, this reality,” she said, voice strained. “It was devastating. ” Her pregnancy so young angered her mother, who nonetheless rushed Íris to the hospital at seven months, rather than let her lose the baby. From the beginning, Íris endured scare after scare. Once, Alícia’s heart stopped “in front of me,” she said. She cried because Alícia had “such a little head,” but doctors waited a month to tell her Alícia had microcephaly and brain calcifications, confirmed by a brain scan. When Alícia was finally discharged from the hospital, Íris sank into a deep depression, enveloped, she said, by “a feeling of rejection” toward her baby. “I did not have that ‘daughter love. ’” They moved in with Alícia’s father, Túlio Martins de Cristo, 20, in the house where his mother lived. He and his mother fed, diapered and did almost everything for Alícia. “Íris would sleep,” said her mother, Enilsa José do Nascimento, 45, a nurse technician. “And her baby would be next to her bed, crying, screaming. ” Íris didn’t even go to the hospital when, twice, Alícia stopped breathing from apnea. Íris was “unlit to life,” her mother said. Without her boyfriend and his mother, “I think her baby would have died. ” Her mother brought Íris salads and juices, urging her to eat. “You have a baby that depends on you,” she said. “Look, she is not ugly, your baby is so pretty. ” Finally, her boyfriend’s mother urged Íris to attend a meeting of the Union of Mothers of Angels (U. M. A.) a group of around 350 Zika mothers. “There were mothers in the same situation as me and even others in worse situations,” Íris marveled. Suddenly, Íris was overcome with urgency to improve Alícia’s chances. “Jeez, get up, Íris!” she told herself. “My God, I am losing time!” She told her mother: “I have to make my daughter walk. If she cannot walk, she is going to be able to see. ” Everything changed. Through rigorous exams, she had qualified for a competitive school, but she switched to a night school. She now takes Alícia to at least two therapy and doctors’ appointments daily, usually in Recife, two hours and at least two bus rides from her hometown, Paulista. She moved in with her mother and    sister, who watch Alícia while Íris attends classes from 7 p. m. to 10 p. m. Afterward, she does homework, then rises when Alícia wakes, often at 4 a. m. On Alícia’s first birthday, Íris had planned visits to three clinics for vision, touch and physical therapy. They also visited Dr. Cristiane Marcela Santos, an ear, nose and throat specialist at Agamenon Magalhães Hospital. “Fifteen?” Dr. Santos exclaimed, stunned that Íris was so knowledgeable. “You are 15 years old?” Everywhere, Íris said, “I ask a lot of questions. ” In pink shorts and lavender top, Alícia’s body resembled a   ’s, but her head was 36 centimeters in circumference, well below normal. Her good hearing and diminished irritability are positive developments, but other symptoms include tight muscles. To keep her hands unclenched, her fingers were splayed open with bright pink tape, which is sometimes also applied to relax her back and chin. Dr. Santos asked about Alícia’s early brain scans. “Calcification in almost all of her brain,” Íris replied. “Has she ever gotten so suffocated that she turned purple and you had to tap her back?” “It happens a lot,” Íris said. “Very serious,” Dr. Santos said. As a mother, Íris seemed “very secure and mature,” Dr. Santos said. “Life made her like this. They stop their own lives so they can live their children’s lives. ” Now just past her 16th birthday, Íris has no time for angst. “I changed my life for Alícia,” she said. “It was me for her and her for me. ” Benches were filling with Zika mothers outside the Association for the Assistance of Disabled Children in Recife when Jaqueline Vieira arrived, cradling her son Daniel, his head too small for his   body, his fingers folded into fists. Blue eyeglasses were strapped to his head, and blue braces decorated with pictures of Mickey Mouse were strapped to his legs. The braces were supposed to be worn all day to fix his   “ballerina feet,” Ms. Vieira knew. But the metal scratched her and made cuddling Daniel uncomfortable, so she mostly put them on for public outings. It was the kind of balancing act she’d become used to. Raising Zika babies is hard enough for families with stable marriages and incomes. But Zika has ripped some marriages apart and torn economic safety nets. Since Daniel’s birth 16 months ago, Ms. Vieira has separated from her husband, lost monthly government assistance, relinquished a job and now patches together a livelihood with other government help. On the bench that Monday, Ms. Vieira barely registered that it was her 26th birthday. Over the weekend in Olinda, their hometown up the coast from Recife, Daniel had convulsed in seizures for three hours straight, his lips purple. Ms. Vieira feared he would stop breathing, but couldn’t get to a hospital with doctors on duty from her downtrodden neighborhood at that late hour, when rats scurry on the rutted roads but no buses were running. She and the other mothers compared notes. One said she briefly couldn’t find her baby that morning, then noticed he’d rolled off the bed. “That’s good,” another said. “He moved. I wish I had a baby like that. ” Suddenly, a van appeared, transporting them to a beauty parlor for pampering paid for by a local singer. At the Velvet Salon, the air was gauzy with   mist. Mothers rested their babies on   settees. Ms. Vieira left Daniel with a cousin because being inside too long agitated him. She chose a   manicure: “She Said Yes” as a base coat, “Kitty White” on top. A hairstylist turned her unruly dark curls straight and shiny. Gazing into a mirror, she snapped a selfie. “Look at me!” she crowed. The respite was  . That afternoon, Daniel’s medicine ran out and Ms. Vieira had no money for more. Daniel’s very conception defied the odds. Ms. Vieira developed uterine cancer when her other child was a toddler. She had resisted doctors’ advice to have her uterus removed, even though they said her chances of having another child were slim. While undergoing chemotherapy, she began dating Dalton Douglas de Oliveira, five years her junior, who attended her evangelical church. They rushed marriage so their church wouldn’t learn of their premarital sex. A month after the wedding, she learned she was three months pregnant. “It was the biggest joy of my life,” she said. Her husband was excited, too. “We wanted to have our child,” he said. Still, “the belly condemned us,” he said, causing stress because what had clearly been a   conception prompted the church to bar them from communion for months. Five months into pregnancy, Ms. Vieira became distraught when a doctor said that an ultrasound showed hydrocephalus, a   brain, and that the baby might die, she recalled. But at seven months, another doctor disagreed, saying, “Look, your son is special, he has a small problem, but what he has is microcephaly,” Ms. Vieira said. “It was good news. ” Her relief evaporated after Daniel’s birth. “I thought it was God’s punishment because I got pregnant even though I was not supposed to,” she said. Caring for a sick child strained the couple’s relationship. Daniel cried so inconsolably that “I thought my life would end,” Ms. Vieira said. Mr. de Oliveira said his wife would not ask him for help and admitted he was too angry at her to offer. “My problem was direct with her and not with the baby,” he said. At two months, Daniel awoke laboring for breath. At the hospital, Ms. Vieira recalled, doctors suspected mold or dust at home was aggravating his lungs, and recommended improving their home’s air quality or moving. Mr. de Oliveira thought his wife, long embarrassed by their     home, was exaggerating. She found another house he declined to move. Things exploded after that. Ms. Vieira gave television interviews claiming her husband “would not give attention to the boy,” she said, adding that the publicity prompted donations from abroad. He retaliated, posting a video insulting her. She began dating and told him, “You are not going to see your son,” he said. After technical disputes about child support, he stopped paying. And when he ignored her on the street, she told people he was really shunning Daniel’s illness. Ms. Vieira, a former supermarket bakery worker receiving government assistance for cancer, struggled to afford Daniel’s seizure medicine, Sabril, about 300 reais ($97) a month. To help, a group of police officers began buying it, and she and other mothers sometimes shared pills. But Daniel’s seizures worsened, seemingly weakening his ability to support his head. She made a cellphone video documenting one episode. “Do you see his little shoes shaking?” she asked. Ms. Vieira started giving Daniel more Sabril  —   three   daily instead of the prescribed two. After his   seizure crisis, she gave him four. Then she ran out. “I had this crazy feeling,” she said. “He had to take the medication, no matter how. ” She called the police officers, but they couldn’t gather enough money. She texted 319 U. M. A. members on WhatsApp. Hours passed. Nobody had extra Sabril. Desperate, she called her estranged husband at his plaster business, demanding the unpaid child support. “If I had it, I would have given it to you,” he said. Borrowing his mother’s credit card, he visited five pharmacies before finding Sabril. Ms. Vieira, in a turquoise U. M. A.   that said “Microcephaly, it’s not the end,” made him pass the medicine through the window bars of her mint green,   house. Soon after, the government stopped Ms. Vieira’s cancer assistance, concluding that she could work. But she felt unable to handle a job, and now collects unemployment and will apply for government Zika benefits. Mr. de Oliveira, 21, resumed paying child support, and increased the amount. Ms. Vieira now allows him to see Daniel. “I still pray to God so that he can be a healthy and perfect child,” he said. “I keep asking, keep asking, keep asking. ” The afternoon after the medication crisis, Ms. Vieira, sifting among pregnancy ultrasounds showing Daniel’s underdeveloped head, found a photo of him smiling. “I love this smile,” she said. Because of Daniel, “I am a better human being,” she said, adding that “if I had had a normal baby, I would not have given as much attention. ” She worries about being inattentive to her    João Pedro. Even while walking him home from school, she carries Daniel, shielding him from sun with a turquoise umbrella. One day, João Pedro playfully covered Daniel’s face with his hand, chanting, “Are you smiling?” When Daniel didn’t respond, João Pedro scampered to a rusty playground, near weathered horses nibbling meager grass. Later, when his neurologist, Dr. Maria Durce Costa Gomes Carvalho, squeezed Daniel into her packed schedule, his rare smile was still absent. He cried and cried. “Look at this tantrum, Daniel, oh my God!” Dr. Gomes exclaimed. “He did not used to be like this,” Ms. Vieira said. Dr. Gomes asked if Daniel looked at things. “Not a lot,” Ms. Vieira said. “Even with glasses?” “No. ” Daniel’s medication was adjusted, reducing his seizures. Dr. Gomes couldn’t predict if he would walk or talk. “What matters  —   right, Jaqueline?  —   is their every achievement. ” Ms. Vieira sighed. “I cannot wait,” she said, “until he falls out of bed. ” Fluffy clouds fluttered over Maria Farinha Beach one Sunday morning and vendors traipsed through the coconut palms selling quail eggs. The   sand was soft, and Ms. Vieira brushed Daniel’s hand through it, trying to awaken his sense of touch, supporting his stiff torso while his head slumped forward. Just days after the salon outing, her hair had reverted to springy curls. She looked tired. She took Daniel to the water, filled with romping children. She dipped him in the ocean, jumped him over a wave, swung him high, and dipped him again.

2 - On the morning of May 18, 2014, Violeta Lagunes was perplexed by a series of strange messages that appeared in her Gmail inbox. It was Election Day to choose the leadership of Mexico’s   Partido Acción Nacional, or PAN, and Lagunes, a former federal congresswoman, was holding a strategy meeting in her office in Puebla city. The emails seemed harmless, at least at first. One appeared to come from the account of a trusted colleague. It asked her to download and review a document. Lagunes clicked on the link, but it seemed to be broken, so she wrote back to her colleague and asked him to send it again. Elsewhere in her inbox was an email from Google warning her that someone had tried to log in to her account. Meanwhile, she began to receive phone calls from PAN allies, who claimed that they had received emails from Lagunes’s account that she did not remember sending. Now Lagunes was worried. Around 1 o’clock, she called the colleague who appeared to have emailed her. She reached him at a restaurant, where he was finishing lunch with other campaign allies. “I did not send you an email,” he insisted. A consultant with the campaign  —   who asked to remain anonymous in order to preserve his relationships with other candidates  —   overheard the conversation. He knew of other campaign workers who had been receiving similar messages: emails with vague subject lines, asking the recipient to review a document or click a link. The campaign, he realized, had been hacked. In the vote for party leader, Lagunes and her allies in Puebla  —   a   drive southeast from Mexico City  —   were supporting the challenger, a senator who promised to return the party to its conservative roots. But the incumbent was backed by Puebla’s powerful governor, Rafael Moreno Valle. One of Mexico’s rising political stars, Moreno Valle is close to Mexico’s president, Enrique Peña Nieto, and has forged an alliance between PAN and Nieto’s centrist Partido Revolucionario Institucional, or PRI, long the dominant force in Mexican politics. Since winning the governorship in 2010, Moreno Valle’s opponents say, his ambitions have grown, and he has resorted to increasingly harsh measures to keep Puebla state  —   including members of his own party  —   under control. “In the beginning, the governor was   and respectful,” Rafael Micalco, a former leader of PAN in Puebla state, told me. “When he became governor, he transformed. Now he controls the party through threats. ” This race to retain control of the party leadership in 2014 was a crucial test for the governor, who was rumored to be considering a run for Mexico’s presidency in 2018. (This past September, Moreno Valle publicly announced his intent to run.) Clashes between the two camps were especially intense in Puebla, where backers of the challenger, Ernesto Cordero, claimed that the governor was using public money to support the incumbent, Gustavo Madero, though the governor’s office has denied these charges. Shortly before the election, Madero’s campaign manager said that Cordero’s side was trying to undermine the legitimacy of the process. “Their strategy is clear from the outset,” he said in an interview with a Mexican magazine. “’u2009‘If I win, good. If not, I was cheated. ’’u2009” After Lagunes’s call on Election Day, her colleagues rushed from the restaurant back to their local headquarters, a hotel conference room that they had nicknamed “the bunker. ” All morning, they had been trying to reach their field network, a group of 40 Cordero canvassers who were working to get out the vote in Puebla state. But the field network seemed to have gone dark. Few of the canvassers were even answering their phones. Hackers, the team concluded, must have found the list of the canvassers’ names and phone numbers  —   widely circulated by email within the campaign  —   and begun to intimidate them. “The day before,” the consultant told me, the field network was “motivated and eager to do this work. After the hack, it was very hard to reach them. The few who did answer said that they had received phone calls saying that their lives were at stake. They were worried that if they went out, they or their families would get hurt. ” According to another worker on Cordero’s campaign, who also requested anonymity, citing fear of reprisal, the message to the canvassers was simple and direct: “We know who you are. If you don’t want any trouble, shut down your cellphone and stop your activity. ” The worker added: “It’s an authoritarian regime. ” Madero won the election, with 57 percent of the 162, 792 votes cast over all. In Puebla, his margin was substantially larger, roughly 74 percent. Cordero’s team decided not to contest the result. They had suspicions about how they were hacked. But it would be another year before any evidence emerged. Their political enemies, leaked documents seemed to show, had built a spying operation using software made by an Italian firm called Hacking Team  —   just one of many private companies that, largely below public notice, have sprung up to aid governments in surveilling the private lives of individual citizens. The industry claims that its products comply with local laws and are used to fight crime and terror. But in many countries around the world, these tools have proved to be equally adept at political espionage. On average, an American office worker sends and receives roughly 120 emails per day, a number that grows with each passing year. The ubiquity and utility of email has turned it into a   record of our    lives, rich with mundane and potentially embarrassing details, stored in a perpetual archive, accessible from anywhere on earth and protected, in some cases, by nothing more than a single password. In the case of Violeta Lagunes, her email login represented a point of vulnerability, a seam where the digital walls protecting her campaign were at the mercy of her human judgment  —   specifically, whether she could determine if a message from an apparently reputable source was real or fake. Nearly two years later, John Podesta, chairman of Hillary Clinton’s campaign, was faced with a similar judgment call. An email warned him that someone in Ukraine had tried to access his Gmail account and asked him to click on a button and reset his password. His senior adviser forwarded the email to one of the campaign’s technology experts. “This is a legitimate email,” he replied, in what the expert later would clarify was a simple typing error on his part he meant to say it was not legitimate. “The gmail one is REAL,” the senior adviser wrote to Podesta and another aide. And so, like Lagunes, Podesta fell into a trap. The button appeared to lead to an official Google page, but it was in fact a meticulously personalized fake, with a domain address linked to a remote cluster of atolls in the South Pacific. The details were designed to trick Podesta into entering his password. This technique is known as “spear phishing. ” It is an especially potent weapon against companies and political organizations because it needs to succeed only one time, against one target. After that, attackers can use the trusted identity of the first compromised account to more easily lure colleagues into opening infected attachments or clicking on malicious links. Not only will a working email password yield years of intraoffice chatter, invoices,   bills and confidential memos it can often be leveraged into control of other personal accounts  —   Twitter, Facebook, Amazon  —   and even access to company servers and internet domains. The Podesta and Lagunes episodes are far from the only cases in which hackers have used information from stolen emails as a weapon against an entire institution. The 2009 “Climategate” incident, which exposed troves of emails from prominent climate researchers, began when hackers remotely broke into servers at a British university with the help of illicitly obtained passwords. The 2014 hack of internal Sony files, which American officials attributed to the North Korean government, began with a series of   emails that attackers then used to dig deeper into Sony’s servers. Each hack yielded the most private thoughts and deeds from the members of each respective organization: their blunt insults, their quashed dissents, their   plans, their smarmy flattery, all chronicled in time down to the hundredth of the second when the author clicked “send. ” In an earlier era, the hackers might have had to engage in riskier behavior, like bribery or burglary. Now, in many cases, all they had to do was send along a link. The White House, C. I. A. and F. B. I. have all claimed that, based on classified evidence, they can trace the hacks of Podesta’s email account (and other hacks of people close to the Clinton campaign) back to the Russian government. But with the rise of private firms like Hacking Team, penetrating the email accounts of political opponents does not require the kind of money and expertise available to major powers. A   website called Insider Surveillance lists more than a dozen companies selling   ethical malware, including   Hacking Team and the German firms FinFisher and Trovicor. Compared with conventional arms, surveillance software is subject to few trade controls a recent attempt by the United States to regulate it under a   pact called the Wassenaar Arrangement failed. “The technology is morally neutral,” says Joel Brenner, a former inspector general of the National Security Agency. “The same program that you use to monitor your babysitter might be used by Bashar Assad or Abdel Fattah   to keep track of whomever they don’t like. ” Hacking Team has fewer than 50 employees, but it has customers all over the world. According to internal documents, its espionage tool, which is called the Remote Control System, or R. C. S. can be licensed for as little as $200, 000 a year  —   well within the budget of a provincial strongman. After it has been surreptitiously installed on a target’s computer or phone, the Remote Control System can invisibly eavesdrop on everything: text messages, emails, phone and Skype calls, location data and so on. Whereas the N. S. A. ’s   programs grab data in transit from switching rooms and undersea cables, the R. C. S. acquires it at the source, right off a target’s device, before it can be encrypted. It carries out an invisible, digitized equivalent of a    . The United States government is almost certainly the world’s most formidable repository of hacking talent, but its most powerful cyberweapons are generally reserved for intelligence agencies and the military. This might explain why, according to company documents, at least two federal   agencies have been Hacking Team clients: the F. B. I. beginning in 2011, and the Drug Enforcement Administration, beginning in 2012. The F. B. I. contract paid Hacking Team more than $700, 000 the D. E. A. appears to have used the software to go after targets in Colombia. Documents show that the company has also sold its software to some of the world’s most repressive governments. Some, like those of Honduras, Ethiopia, Bahrain, Morocco, Egypt and Saudi Arabia, are Western allies. Other countries, like Uzbekistan and Turkey, have a more troubled relationship. A few are openly hostile to the West. Between 2012 and 2014, Hacking Team was paid nearly one million euros by the government of Sudan, a United   state sponsor of terrorism. Even more notable, in light of recent events, is the   relationship that Hacking Team carried on with the F. S. B. one of Russia’s main intelligence agencies. As with Puebla, Hacking Team used a middleman, a research agency called Kvant, to handle its sales to Russia. Between 2012 and 2014, the agency paid Hacking Team 451, 000 euros to license the Remote Control System. Hacking Team claims that it draws the line at customers who commit “gross   abuses” and that it sells exclusively to governments operating within the laws of their own countries. In at least one case, David Vincenzetti, Hacking Team’s founder and chief executive, told a salesman to hold off on a potential Mexican client. “We sell to official, governmental LEAs”  —     agencies  —   “and security agencies ONLY,” Vincenzetti wrote in an email. But at other times, a more casual attitude prevailed inside the company. “If one sells sandwiches to Sudan, he is not subject, as far as my knowledge goes, to the law,” one Hacking Team lawyer wrote in an internal email. “Hacking Team should be treated like a sandwich vendor. ” When asked about its arrangements in various countries, the company responded that it “does not comment on confidential business dealings. ” Its American spokesman, Eric Rabe, did tell me that neither Russia nor Sudan is a current Hacking Team customer. (The relationships, Rabe wrote, ended in 2014, Russia because “the Putin government evolved from one considered friendly to the West to a more hostile regime” and Sudan “because of concerns about the country’s ability to use the system in accordance with the H. T. contract. ”) Separately, the company confirmed that the state of Puebla was, in fact, a former client. Until recently, most of what was known about the world of private surveillance companies was a matter of hearsay and speculation. Industry players kept a low profile, operating discreetly from rented offices and meeting potential customers in person a few times a year at carefully screened trade shows. This is why it was so notable when, in July 2015, an unusual tweet appeared in Hacking Team’s Twitter feed. “Since we have nothing to hide,” it read, “we’re publishing all our emails, files and source code. ” Then came another tweet, with links to a downloadable file called Hacked Team. The file was huge, 420 gigabytes of material scraped from Hacking Team’s internal servers. Inside were 33 folders containing the company’s contracts, payroll documents, invoices, legal memos,   records and a   cache of email correspondence from the chief executive on down. Hacking Team had itself been hacked. WikiLeaks pounced on the breach and quickly uploaded the emails into a searchable database. Anyone with an internet connection could now read the chief executive joking about how his company was in the business of selling “the evilest technology on earth. ” You could browse Hacking Team’s source code, including one line using “bomb_blueprints. pdf” as a placeholder for files that might be found on a target’s device. On Reddit, an online peanut gallery formed around the   online habits of one Hacking Team engineer and his own notably weak passwords  —   HTPassword! P4ssword, Passw0rd. But the most damaging exposures in the leak by far were Hacking Team’s client list and the names of some of the clients’ targets. In South Korea, newspapers focused on evidence suggesting that Hacking Team’s software had helped the nation’s intelligence service rig an election after the leak, one agent who had reportedly used the system there committed suicide. In Ecuador, a magazine found an email with seven phone numbers that the government appeared to have targeted with the R. C. S. Three belonged to lawmakers a fourth to the mayor of Quito all four were members of the opposition party. With the source code for the Remote Control System now public, the company and its clients had to stop using it temporarily. By the end of the year, though, Hacking Team had updated its product and was trying to rebuild its reputation. I was curious whether a company that profited from online breaches could recover from its own. Eric Rabe, the American spokesman, sounded eager to meet me for coffee in Philadelphia. A grandfather and former   anchor, he exudes   credibility. “If you disagree with someone on the internet,” he said, of the Hacked Team files, with a wave of his hand, “there’s no need to have a   debate. Just go destroy them. ” A couple of months later, I went to Milan to visit Hacking Team’s headquarters, a stately gray apartment building with boxes of limp flowers adorning a few of its sooty sills. Waiting to demonstrate the company’s software were Rabe Philippe Vinci, a company vice president and Alessandro Scarafile, a young engineer. Scarafile had gathered a Dell desktop computer and three smartphones: iPhone, BlackBerry and Android. The screen from his own laptop, which represented the console of a client intelligence agency, was projected on the wall. Several icons represented the various streams of data that could potentially be acquired by gaining control of the target’s computer: images from   cameras, sound from   mikes, screenshots, detailed records of applications opened and bitcoins transferred, a continuous log of location with latitude and longitude, and logs of address books, calendars, phone calls, Skype calls and passwords, as well as websites visited. A key logger recorded every key that was pressed. It was a lot to keep track of. Two other views, called “line of events” and “line of actions,” assembled the information into chronological order. Scarafile, who was playing both the customer and the target, or “bad guy,” turned on the Dell. Judging by the background on the desktop, a gothic scene framed by castlelike silhouettes, our target seemed to be planning a terrorist attack from Transylvania. There are three methods, Scarafile explained, for getting the Remote Control System onto a target’s device. Customers can gain physical access to the device and then infect it with a USB stick or memory card. They can beam the R. C. S. in over a   network. Or they can send the customer an email and get him to click on an infected attachment  —   usually a file from a   program like Microsoft Word or PowerPoint. Scarafile did not mention a fourth method, one described by Hacking Team’s critics and referred to in its internal emails: the installation of the R. C. S. through a more elaborate process called “network injection,” which is said to involve pinpointing the target’s exact location on the internet, observing the person as he orders up, say, a YouTube cat video, and then serving up a doctored version of the same page, one with the desired cat video playing in the foreground  —   YouTube logo and all  —   as the R. C. S. discreetly rolls in past the digital gates. Whatever the method of infection, the malicious code, known as an “agent,” then communicates with its masters anonymously, its dispatches routed through a series of dedicated servers scattered around the world. Even if the target gets suspicious and figures out that something is wrong, this chain of servers makes it nearly impossible for him to figure out exactly who is using Hacking Team’s product to spy on him. For the demo, Scarafile opted for the third method, which he referred to as “a bit of social engineering. ” Using the customer’s computer, he sent the target an email with a Word file attached. Then he returned to the target’s computer and   on it, just as Lagunes had clicked on the link in her inbox. “From now on,” he said, “this system is currently infected, or monitored, by the Remote Control System. ” It would remain so even if the suspect turned off his machine or logged out. On the timeline, the target appeared as a stubbly lout in an undershirt, named “Jimmy Page . .. head of the terrorist cell. ” Using Jimmy Page’s Dell, Scarafile logged into Page’s Gmail, Facebook and Twitter. He opened up Skype, perused Page’s criminal colleagues (Don Corleone, Harry Potter, Keyser Soze) and left one of them a voice mail message from Page’s phone. Accessing a USB drive attached to the infected computer, Scarafile opened an encrypted file that turned out to contain an order to “kill David Vincenzetti. ” R. C. S. captured it all, including periodic snapshots of Scarafile, as Page, at work. “I don’t like the words ‘inject’ and ‘infect,’’u2009” Vinci, the vice president, said. “R. C. S. is deploying the agent into the device of the target because you want to monitor some of his activities. Exactly the way that law enforcement is listening to some of your phone calls, right?” Rabe had told me that Vincenzetti was “a fighter,” and his combative side was apparent from a collage of magazine clippings and printouts taped to the wall beside his desk  —   a sort of mood board, like those used in the advertising industry to gather inspiration before the unveiling of a new brand. Vincenzetti’s mood board, though, wasn’t about sneakers or cola. It was about the global struggle for power, which he seemed to envision as one big conflict, a battle between the good guys and the bad guys. On the good side was a photo of the bell that aspiring Navy SEALs can ring should they want to quit the program during Hell Week, and a quote from another entrepreneur that “business is war. ” On the bad side, Vincenzetti had taped up a satellite image showing one of the hottest zones of international tension, the artificial islands rising in the South China Sea, a line of terrestrial pawns advancing China’s sphere of influence. Beside it was a chart about Iran, depicting how the country could continue to advance its nuclear program despite the recent   deal. “I think the Iran deal is just terrible,” Vincenzetti said, and then added, sarcastically, “Oh, it’s such a very peaceful expansion. Very peaceful. ” “That is not an official company position,” Rabe interjected. Vincenzetti, now 48, is a familiar type  —   a ferociously competitive, driven entrepreneur whose existence is organized around his work. He has a wife, who was born in Morocco, and no children. His small,   eyes can make him seem sleepily blasé. On the morning we met at Hacking Team’s offices, he wore jeans, a   cardigan and a striped shirt, unbuttoned to midchest. He seemed more comfortable on his feet than sitting down. As we talked in a conference room, he periodically leapt to his feet and stalked around the table, considering in turn the espresso machine, the view from the window, a case of bottled water. “If I wanted to break into this room, how would I do it?” he asked. “There is a door, and there are two windows. ” He pressed his hands against the glass panes. “The perimeter is the first thing you must secure,” he continued. Securing data was what he did earlier in his career. Now he had moved on. “If you cannot break into a bank, you cannot protect a bank. So when you are in security, really there is no difference between thinking offensively and defensively. ” In the   Vincenzetti’s parents, a salesman and a schoolteacher, bought him a Commodore 64, one of the earliest personal computers. He soon created a   clone, a Tron   game and a   adventure game. As a   student at the University of Milan in the ’90s, he became fascinated by cryptography he corresponded with programmers around the world about new cryptographic theories and wrote code for email encryption. In his senior year, he was appointed to administer the university’s internal network, a post that was usually reserved for a graduate student. Vincenzetti remembers these early days as a time when “everything was free and no one was trying to harm you. We were wide open and accessible. All the best were called hackers, and I was a hacker. ” Vincenzetti left university early and founded three companies, all of them focused on defensive cybersecurity. After he founded Hacking Team in 2003, he tried to sell his services to Italian police agencies but found them skeptical that Mafiosi and other   criminals would ever bother to encrypt their communications. In Italy, the police were also used to getting whatever they needed through wiretaps, arranged with varying degrees of formality through their contacts at telecommunications firms. But after the 2004 Madrid train bombings, which were coordinated via cellphones and the internet, police officers and intelligence agents not just in Italy but all across Europe became interested in contracting with   vendors, part of an emerging arms race over   encryption. The growth of Skype made it easy for users to encrypt their communications, and the authorities were eager to pay for countermeasures like the Remote Control System. Singapore, Hacking Team’s first   client, signed on in 2008. The company’s Middle Eastern business took off in 2011, a boom that coincided with the beginning of the Arab Spring. By then, Hacking Team had entered a growth phase, its business driven in part by demand among   governments for   surveillance tools. According to two former employees, the company held talks with Col. Muammar  ’s chief security officer, who wanted to build a countrywide   scheme that could be embedded in every Libyan cellphone. (Rabe would not confirm or deny that this meeting occurred, and added: “The company often receives requests to provide services that it does not have available or would sell. ”) The United Nations, which prohibits the export of “electronic weaponry” to Sudan, has investigated Hacking Team’s activities there. Nineteen members of the Italian Parliament signed a petition raising the question of whether the Egyptian government might have used the R. C. S. to track Giulio Regeni, a    Italian student who appears to have been under government surveillance and whose mutilated body turned up on the side of a road in Egypt last year. Hacking Team’s software has not been connected to the case, but the company has done business with the current Egyptian regime. As part of the controversy, the Italian government temporarily revoked Hacking Team’s global export license, so that for several months the company had to file a separate application for each of its customers outside the European Union. (When I brought up the Regeni case with Rabe, he called the dead student “this Italian national who got himself killed in Egypt. ” He cited Hacking Team’s official policy  —   the company neither knows nor desires to know the identities of the people its customers choose to target. “There is no evidence that Hacking Team’s software had anything to do with Regeni’s demise,” Rabe said.) All Hacking Team customers sign contracts agreeing to comply with local laws. The company says that it vets potential customers and studies reports from journalists and   groups, looking for “objective evidence or credible concerns” that its products are being abused. But when it comes to Hacking Team’s own interactions with customers, leaked documents suggest that employees have sometimes turned a blind eye. In the case of the Puebla government and other Latin American customers, Hacking Team employees appeared to ignore warnings suggesting that the Remote Control System was being used to gather intelligence on the political opposition. On multiple occasions, customers emailed Hacking Team attachments with   content, including polling data, party registration forms and invitations addressed to and signed by elected officials. Rather than ask what these files had to do with fighting crime and drug trafficking, Hacking Team   members simply emailed them back, as requested, with an embedded “exploit,” turning the document into a surveillance tool to be used against whomever it was sent on to. Asked about these cases, Rabe replied that customers “are not supposed to be using it for political purposes, but I don’t think it’s reasonable to expect that an Italian computer programmer,” i. e. a support technician, “would have seen these files and known what was going on. . .. I think that’s a stretch, that an Italian software guy could know that an individual is a dissident. ” Hacking Team’s most persistent critic is Citizen Lab, a research group at the University of Toronto’s Munk School of Global Affairs. Before the Hacked Team leak, Citizen Lab documented cases in which Hacking Team software turned up on the devices of activists in Morocco and the United Arab Emirates, as well as an   journalist in Alexandria, Va. Ronald Deibert, Citizen Lab’s director, told me that Hacking Team “is a company that appears to have no internal controls on abuse of its products. ” When I asked Vincenzetti about this, he said that Citizen Lab was motivated by money, noting that the group won a   grant a week after publishing a report on Hacking Team’s sales to Ethiopia. “Their identity,” he said, “is: ‘I am the defender of free speech, I am the defender of liberty and democracy.’ O. K. So am I. So is every rational guy. ” If Citizen Lab really cared about good and evil, he said, it would be fighting China and Iran. Almost immediately after the Hacked Team documents went online, they were being pored over by R3D, a Mexico     group. Luis Fernando García, R3D’s director, says that intimidation and online surveillance have increased under Peña Nieto’s presidency, and he took notice when Citizen Lab, in 2014, released a report that traced a chain of servers associated with Hacking Team that routed data through Hong Kong, London, Amsterdam and Atlanta before terminating somewhere inside Mexico. Exactly who was on the receiving end of the traffic and what they were doing with it was unknown at the time, but now R3D’s team recognized that this could be their chance to find out. Shortly thereafter, R3D published three invoices from the Hacked Team cache showing that one state government  —   that of Jalisco, on the Pacific Coast  —   had paid the company nearly half a million euros for the Remote Control System. Soon other documents were found in the leak to implicate several more states, including Puebla, though most of the states denied ever using the software. (Jalisco later admitted to purchasing the system, which it claimed was for its prosecutor’s office.) The story failed to get much traction in the Mexican press, except in Puebla, after R3D connected with Lado B, a small   collective there. The site’s name translates to “B Side,” as in the back of a hit single  —   symbolizing its dedication to telling stories that would otherwise go untold. Lado B’s editor, Ernesto Aroche, was not surprised that Puebla’s government had been using the Remote Control System. In Moreno Valle’s six years as governor there, he has spent lavishly on new surveillance systems, including multiple “security arches,”   structures that scrutinize traffic with video cameras and   and whose cost had raised some questions in the local press. Beginning in 2013, Aroche began noticing solicitations on the   website for hidden cameras and other spying equipment. When he filed a   request about them, the government’s form response indicated that these orders had never been filled, but Aroche was skeptical, given the mounting evidence that Moreno Valle’s administration had begun using its security apparatus for political purposes. There were periodic   of homes belonging to dissident politicians and journalists, with the burglars sometimes taking little besides their victims’ laptops. Politicians would answer calls from unknown numbers, only to hear their own taped conversations played back to them. Another journalist, Fernando Maldonado, received an unmarked envelope full of what were purportedly transcripts of 400 private phone calls made by Puebla politicians. As Aroche and R3D sifted through the Hacked Team file dump, they discovered that the files on Puebla had more detail than those dealing with Hacking Team’s other Mexican accounts. The Puebla client often wrote emails asking for help with infecting a particular document with a malicious virus. Some of these came from an account  —   soporteuiamx@gmail. com  —   that also appears in many of Hacking Team’s internal support tickets. One of those tickets documents a client’s request for help in infecting an attachment: an invitation to attend an event for a Mexican political organization, signed by Violeta Lagunes and addressed to another party colleague opposed to the governor. Aroche interviewed politicians and journalists who were on the receiving end of the infected emails contained in the Hacked Team trove. According to a 2015 article that Lado B published in conjunction with a politics website, the Puebla group sent Hacking Team at least 47 requests to infect specific files that it would then forward on to their targets. Almost all of those files had to do with political issues. Going through the Hacked Team materials, Aroche found the name of a Puebla government employee who seemed to be working within the spying operation. “Before, we had been talking about ghosts,” Aroche told me. “Now, we could prove it. We started putting names on the actors. ” More than a year later, there have been no political repercussions for the governor or his allies in Puebla. I met Aroche this fall at the Lado B offices, a small room facing a courtyard in a crumbling stone building from Puebla’s colonial days. The only suggestion of Lado B’s presence was a small sticker on the window. Inside, Aroche was thumbing through an envelope of documents that he had wrung out of the state government. Two redacted contracts signed by Puebla officials showed an arrangement between the state government and a company called Sym Servicios Integrales, which Aroche’s reporting had identified as an intermediary for Hacking Team. The details of what had been purchased were redacted. “These contracts demonstrate that the Puebla government had a commercial relationship with this company,” Aroche said. “I’m sorry if they’re a little bit stained  —   I dropped some coffee on them. ” (Sym Servicios Integrales says it “never sold H. T. technology to the state of Puebla. ”) In a brief written statement from Sagrario Conde Valerio, a spokeswoman, the government of Puebla denied allegations of spying and claimed that “no relationship exists nor has ever existed between the government of Puebla and the company ‘Hacking Team. ’’u2009” The government declined to respond further to a list of questions. But a former official from Moreno Valle’s administration claimed to me that more than $1 million was being diverted from the state budget each year to fund the   unit. Documents from the Hacked Team archive indicate that Hacking Team received an order from the government of Puebla for 415, 000 euros in the spring of 2013, and that Hacking Team booked hotel rooms for three of its associates who traveled to Puebla in May of that year. Some of the R. C. S. training, I was told, took place in a green building on a residential street. When I visited the purported site this fall, lettering above the door said that the building was once a school. Now it had bars across the door and mirrored windows. Neighbors told me it had been abandoned for several months. “People would come and go,” one woman said. “They were very secretive. They would drop off equipment, take away equipment. Then one day, about a year ago, they came and took everything away and left. ” Another neighbor said that he often saw a   car parked in front of the house and a man with a limp entering and leaving  —   a former Mexican intelligence agent, according to someone who was present during the Hacking Team training. Mexico is Hacking Team’s biggest export market, accounting for nearly six million euros in sales, according to leaked documents. Ostensibly, the Remote Control System is intended for fighting criminals and drug traffickers there. (“There have been reports that the software was used in the apprehension of Chapo Guzman,” Rabe told me, referring to the Mexican drug lord. “I can’t confirm it. ”) The files indicate that at least seven other Mexican state governments were Hacking Team clients, but because they did not use email to the same extent as Puebla, their activities are harder to track. Multiple former Hacking Team employees told me that abuses of the software were not limited to Puebla. One former employee described having the system set up inside a mayor’s office. Katitza Rodríguez,   director at the Electronic Frontier Foundation, says that Mexican law allows for interception of communication, like the wiretapping of phone lines, but it does not grant precise legal authority to use new, powerful invasive tools like those created by Hacking Team. And she argues that it is much more dangerous in Mexico than in other Western countries, where checks and balances are stronger. “This is much more intrusive than the interception of a phone call,” she said. “They are not only listening they are taking over your laptop. Mexico needs to have a full debate in Congress about what legal safeguards are needed for this kind of surveillance or if the government should be using it at all. ” The Hacked Team files indicate that in   Hacking Team opened an American subsidiary and leased office space in Reston, Va. a   drive from the C. I. A. ’s headquarters. The company drew up a “U. S. action plan,” calling for a significant North American expansion, with new hires and rounds of pitches to the Department of Justice, the United States military and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Hacking Team was also targeting another potentially lucrative market: American state and local governments. It pitched the R. C. S. to   agencies in San Bernardino, Calif. Washington New York Fort Lauderdale and Orlando. In a risk assessment commissioned by the company, lawyers advised that such sales were probably legal, so long as the product was provided “at a distance” from actual investigations and used “in the normal course of government operations. ” American expansion by companies like Hacking Team may not face much resistance from the federal government, which is becoming more accepting of electronic surveillance as part of normal police work. Last year, the Justice Department successfully changed the rules of criminal procedure, making it easier for federal agents to hack into multiple computers with a single warrant. Senator Steve Daines of Montana, who tried to block the change, complained that it gives “unlimited power for unlimited hacking. ” In a 2014 address, now referred to in cybersecurity circles as his “Going Dark” speech, the F. B. I. ’s director, James Comey, argued that the encryption built into Apple products posed a threat to public safety  —   enabling not only terrorism but also drug trafficking, child abuse and   . Instead of “a safe that can’t be cracked,” Comey wanted technology companies to lend him the combination. “The law hasn’t kept pace with technology, and this disconnect has created a significant   problem,” Comey said. “We call it ‘going dark. ’’u2009” As the United States government has argued for weaker protections around personal communications, American businesses have been spreading more powerful surveillance tools around the world. Many foreign   agencies already buy   products from SS8  —   a company backed by the storied   firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield Byers  —   as well as from the Harris Corporation, a $13 billion company based in Florida and traded on the New York Stock Exchange. At least 25 American police departments have used Harris’s Stingray device, which mimics cellphone towers and can intercept cellphone calls within 200 meters. All known sales of Stingrays to local law enforcement have been authorized by the F. B. I. which has since fought in court to keep those sales secret. In Baltimore alone, Stingrays have been used more than 4, 000 times, in routine drug investigations. Much less is known about another Harris product, the advanced Hailstorm, which is also sold to local police departments. Hailstorm is reportedly capable of implanting malware that can take control of a targeted phone, much like Hacking Team’s R. C. S. The Hacked Team documents that offer the most revealing view of the company’s ethos happen to be the most public ones. For years, as often as two or three times a day, Vincenzetti sent mass emails to hundreds of his business contacts. The recipients included numerous members of the United States military and intelligence community, as well as government employees from the city of Cincinnati and the Internal Revenue Service. In these messages, Vincenzetti often addresses this audience collectively as “gents. ” The news he cites is a reminder of how the geopolitical winds have been blowing in favor of Hacking Team and other   allies of law and order. In Vincenzetti’s world, the system is always, as George Tenet famously said about  . 11 intelligence, “blinking red”: the imploding Middle East a restive,   Russia battalions of   jihadis roaming around Europe with their encrypted thumb drives and   expertise. Against this backdrop of   danger, concerns about human rights are naïve at best. Vincenzetti’s emails vividly exploit this sense of danger and alarm. He writes about shadowy gangs of Iranian hackers using the #JeSuisCharlie hashtag to inject malware into French laptops. He celebrates the conviction of Ross Ulbricht, a. k. a. the Dread Pirate Roberts, creator of the Silk Road website. After the arrests of two Uzbek men in Brooklyn for telling informants that they wanted to join up with ISIS, Vincenzetti writes of “a very serious terrorist plot on American soil foiled. ” He went on to tap out this sales pitch: The following day, he gave a few more hints: The tone of Vincenzetti’s sales patter was strangely upbeat, especially considering his dire forecasts. It was almost as if he were in the business of selling microwave ovens or sandwiches, not tools through which the private lives of criminals (and whoever else) could be fully laid bare. Vincenzetti’s unstated equation  —   privacy is secrecy, and secrecy is terrorism  —   is less controversial than it might appear. A supportive echo can be heard in many public statements from American officials, which Vincenzetti often cut and pasted into his mass emails. The former attorney general Eric Holder called for “investigative and prosecutorial tools that allow us to be  . ” When Comey warned that “encryption threatens to lead all of us to a very dark place,” Vincenzetti forwarded it along approvingly, with the tagline: “We DO have an answer to many if not all of his concerns. ” And when, in May 2015, Comey warned of a “threat” that had “morphed” into “a chaotic spider web,” Vincenzetti sent word to his “gents” as well. One month later, an anonymous hack revealed Hacking Team’s own invisible spider web, and one year later, during the   to Election Day, came the internal emails of the Democratic Party. By then it was clear that tools for digital burglary had spread well beyond the hands of regular police officers. Comey had argued for weaker safes Vincenzetti was selling longer crowbars. They could be used to chase Jimmy Page, arrest Chapo Guzman, fight crime, smear a political opponent or just keep tabs on someone, anyone. To be hidden is to be a terrorist  —   this was the heart of his pitch. Any digital redoubt that could resist being pried open was a public risk and a private opportunity.



############################################################

3 - On’u2009the morning after Election Day, Chuck Schumer’s phone rang. It was Donald Trump. Trump has repeatedly described Schumer as his friend  —   which, the New York senator was at pains to clarify when we first spoke in   “isn’t quite true. ” There had been the occasional favor at Schumer’s request, Trump hosted a   for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee at    in 2008, and Schumer made a cameo on “The Apprentice” in 2006. Beyond that, Schumer told me: “I bump into him at meetings here and there. We never went out to dinner once. We never played golf together. I sort of knew him. ” On election night, Schumer was at Hillary Clinton’s party at the Javits Convention Center in Midtown Manhattan when, around 8 p. m. he saw some troubling exit polls coming out of Florida and North Carolina. They showed that   women in both states  —   a demographic that everyone assumed would be a lock  —   were underperforming for Clinton. Schumer called one of her top campaign advisers, who tried to reassure him. “He says, ‘Don’t worry, our firewalls in Wisconsin and Pennsylvania and Michigan are strong,’’u2009” Schumer recalls. “’u2009‘There’s no way Trump can win. ’’u2009” Schumer kept up appearances. He tweeted a photo of himself in front of a catering table with Kate McKinnon, who plays Clinton on “Saturday Night Live” (“I got to congratulate Hillary Clinton  —   oops, wrong Hillary! ”) and then took the stage, leading the crowd in a chant of “I believe that she will win!” But by shortly after 11 p. m. Trump had taken Ohio and North Carolina. The probability dashboards on the   websites had lurched Trumpward, and an unthinkable future was lumbering into view. Schumer, who was in line to succeed Harry Reid as the   Democrat in the Senate after Reid’s retirement in December, had spent roughly $8 million of his own campaign funds on Democratic senatorial campaigns in other states in hopes of retaking control of the upper chamber, which the Democrats lost in 2014, and of making himself the majority leader. On his bookshelf he kept a copy of “Master of the Senate,” the historian Robert Caro’s exhaustive chronicle of Lyndon Johnson’s years as the Democratic majority leader, which Caro had inscribed to Schumer: “Whose career I have been following for years with real admiration, so that I have no doubt that he will be a great leader of senators. ” But by the early hours of Wednesday it was clear that the Democrats would not take the Senate and that Schumer would not be Lyndon Johnson. “We’ll work together,” Trump said on the phone call. He said he wanted to repeal the Affordable Care Act  —   “that A. C. A. is terrible,” he told Schumer  —   which was an obvious nonstarter for the incoming minority leader. He also said he wanted a   infrastructure plan. “I said, ‘Well, a trillion dollars sounds good to me,’’u2009” Schumer told me. But to get Democrats on board, he warned, three conditions had to be met. “You can’t do it with these tax breaks,” he said. Second, he could not “cut the programs we care about  —   Medicare, education, scientific research  —   to pay for this. It’s got to be new spending. ” Finally, the bill had to preserve existing environmental and labor protections. “I said, ‘To do that, you’re going to have to get half your party really mad at you. ’’u2009” Schumer, as he saw it, was calling Trump’s bluff. “Donald Trump ran as an   populist  —   against both the Democratic and Republican establishments,” he told me. Whether or not he had meant it, the Democrats could try to hold him to it. On the several occasions that Trump called Schumer in the weeks after the election, Schumer argued that he could try to govern as a   conservative, but “America is not a   country,” and there would be electoral consequences. It might not have been the strongest card to play, but Schumer did not have a strong hand. The election in November left the Democrats stripped of power at every level of federal authority. Schumer would now possess the only means they had of exerting even limited influence over Trump’s agenda: a Senate Democratic caucus that, while several seats shy of a majority, was large enough to make life complicated for Senate Republicans. But that could happen only if the Democrats formed a united front  —   and it was unclear whether they could, or even wanted to. The 2016 election was not just an electoral crisis for the party but also an existential one, more severe than any that the Democrats had experienced in decades. The party had glided through the campaign with a sense of destiny: In July, Schumer breezily remarked that “For every   Democrat we will lose in western Pennsylvania, we will pick up two, three moderate Republicans in the suburbs in Philadelphia, and you can repeat that in Ohio and Illinois and Wisconsin. ” Then Hillary Clinton lost to a candidate who revived a strain of nativist, nationalist politics that had been dormant in the Republican Party for at least a generation, and who won in part on the ballots of Barack Obama voters in traditionally Democratic strongholds like Michigan and Wisconsin. “I sleep like a baby,” Chris Murphy, the Democratic senator from Connecticut, told me. “And I can sleep anywhere  —   on the road, on the floor, in my kid’s bed jammed up against the wall. ” But on election night, he says: “It’s so cliché, but I stayed up all night. I was, mentally, totally unprepared. At some level, you do have this  —   ” he trailed off and was silent for a moment. “You do start to question whether you know the country as well as you thought. ” The Democratic primaries and caucuses, meanwhile, had left the party sharply divided. Clinton lost 22 states to Bernie Sanders, Vermont’s independent and   socialist senator, whose    challenge had stirred a   excitement that Clinton’s campaign conspicuously lacked and acrimoniously split the Democratic Party’s centrist and   contingents  —   the latter of which viewed the Obama years as a missed opportunity to fight economic inequality, reorient trade policy and rein in Wall Street. Clinton might have won the popular vote, but in a way, this only amplified the confusion: about whether the party needed to transform or simply tinker whether it needed to move to the right or to the left whether the voters who were willing to vote for a candidate who said the things Trump said could be won back at all. These were problems for anyone trying to chart a course for the Democrats, but in a particularly acute way they were problems for Schumer, a politician who was better known as a dealmaker, a student of consensus, than as a pathfinder. As majority leader, the next two years might have been the pinnacle of his career: bill signings, valedictory news conferences (and few politicians visibly delight in news conferences the way Schumer does) the sorts of   negotiations that historians like Caro write books about. Instead, Schumer found himself with a job that The Times Union, in Albany, observed two days after the election was “something of a booby prize. ” The Democrats, who spent Obama’s presidency railing against Republican obstructionism, would soon be facing a president who, in his stated ambitions to unmake much of Obama’s legacy, was all but inviting them to try the same. Whether this was in Schumer’s’u200b ’u200bDNA was one question. Whether it was in t’u200bhe party’s’u200b ’u200bwas another. The Democrats have never been a natural opposition party, or a particularly effective one. Republicans from Reagan to the Tea Party broadly believed in reducing government, as the   activist Grover Norquist famously put it, “to the size where I can drag it into the bathroom and drown it in the bathtub. ” Cutting budgets and eliminating programs might require a Republican president and a congressional majority, but lacking this, a disciplined minority party could gum up the works, starving existing initiatives and blocking attempts to expand them. Democrats, by contrast, have generally been united by a belief in government that tries to do big things, in the manner of Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal or Johnson’s Great Society or, later, Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act  —   a belief that, practically speaking, requires either landslide majorities or a willingness to compromise. Several   polls in recent years have found that this difference is reflected in the party’s electorates, which have increasingly come to view the political process in starkly different ways. In a 2014 Pew survey, 82 percent of people who identified as “consistently liberal” said they liked politicians who were willing to make compromises just 32 percent of “consistently conservative” respondents agreed. The week of Trump’s inauguration, David Brock  —   the onetime conservative journalist turned liberal gadfly  —   hosted a private gathering of Democratic luminaries at Turnberry Isle, a golf resort outside Miami. One speaker Brock invited was Ronald Klain, the former chief of staff to Vice Presidents Al Gore and Joe Biden, who previously worked for Tom Daschle, the Senate minority leader, in the aftermath of the 1994 midterms, when the Republicans took control of both houses of Congress for the first time in 40 years. Addressing Brock’s crowd, Klain called for Democrats to embrace what he dubbed the   Fight Club. As Klain learned from working with Daschle, “You have to take on a lot of fights to win any fights,” he told me recently. “When you’re in the minority, you can’t be too choosy. I advocated a strategy of more comprehensive opposition. ” But plenty of the Democrats present  —   among them the Chicago mayor and former White House chief of staff Rahm Emanuel, who was sharing the stage with Klain  —   disagreed. “At the time, there was more of a divide,” Klain told me. “The ‘we gotta pick our spots’ philosophy: ‘He’s a new president  —   we don’t want to look like McConnell looked in 2009. ’’u2009” Mitch McConnell, the Republican senator from Kentucky who was then the minority leader and is now majority leader, reportedly mapped out a program of   resistance shortly before Obama took office  —   a strategy that Democrats spent subsequent years attacking as cynical and irresponsible. “We’re Democrats,” Klain said. “We like to govern. ” Among the Democrats who appeared to share Klain’s postelection view was Harry Reid, Schumer’s predecessor as minority leader, who would be retiring in December. Reid and Schumer, then Reid’s deputy, were an effective team for years in the Senate, partners in a       act. Schumer was known as a   partisan during his 18 years in the House of Representatives, but in the Senate he had become an avatar of the gabby   bonhomie that had historically characterized the upper chamber. “You know, I get along,” Schumer told me. “I’m in the gym in the morning, I’m talking with Thune, and Lamar, and Cornyn all the time,” he said, referring to the Republican Senators John Thune, Lamar Alexander and John Cornyn. “I’m friends with them. They attack me, I attack them. We understand that. ” This was the old way of the Senate  —   one that began to fade in the late 1970s as the ideological consolidation of the parties accelerated, reducing their need and taste for compromise. By the time Schumer arrived in 1999, four years after the Newt   Republican revolution, it was fast becoming an anachronism, with meals in the senators’ bipartisan dining room giving way to   caucus lunches. By the time Reid became minority leader, amid the   polarization of George W. Bush’s second term, it was all but gone. Reid, like his Republican counterpart, McConnell, was one of the rare politicians who seemed to genuinely not care if people liked him or not. He was known for his   floor speeches, sandbags of verbiage delivered with minimal theatrics and less ambiguity of purpose. It was in this mode that he took to the Senate floor, a week after the election, and drew a line. Senate Democrats had tried for years to pass the kind of infrastructure bill Trump had suggested, Reid reminded his colleagues, only to run up against Republican opposition. “If Trump wants to pursue policies that will help working people, Democrats will take a pragmatic approach,” he said. “But we also have other responsibilities. ” He made clear that the price of Democratic cooperation should be Trump’s dropping of Stephen K. Bannon, the former Breitbart News executive chairman who ran his campaign and whom Trump named as his chief White House strategist two days earlier. “In his first official act, Trump appointed a man who is seen as a champion of white supremacy as the No. 1 strategist in his White House,” Reid said. “As long as a champion of racial division is a step away from the Oval Office,” he added, “it will be impossible to take Trump’s efforts to heal the nation seriously. ” Reid and Schumer might have differed temperamentally, but they were both thinking about the 2018 midterm elections, in which 25 Democratic senators would be defending their seats. Lose eight seats, and the Republicans would have 60, enough to override a Democratic filibuster  —   at which point the Democrats’ debates about what they stood for or against would be academic. Five of the those senators  —  “the Big Five,” Schumer called them  —   were moderate Democrats in states in the Midwest, the Mountain West and Appalachia that Trump had just won handily. The abiding question was what, exactly, the voters who cast ballots for both Trump and, say, North Dakota’s Democratic senator, Heidi Heitkamp, were voting for in 2016 the party was still far from a clear answer. Schumer, who began holding weekly dinners with the Big Five after the election, believed it was best to allow these senators to cooperate with Trump as necessary. But according to members of Reid’s staff at the time, Reid (who declined to comment) worried that, given Trump’s lack of interest in policy detail and disregard for ethical conflicts, even   legislative compromises could prove to be politically costly  —   that an eventual backlash against the president would also fall upon Democrats who gestured toward working with him. “Reid didn’t want to validate the assumption that this incompetent blowhard could get a bill to the floor in the first place, which has proved to be a struggle for Trump so far,” Adam Jentleson, at the time Reid’s deputy chief of staff, told me. Democrats were also still deeply divided over whether it was even possible to navigate 2017 without resolving the ideological and policy differences that fractured the party in 2016. At a   meeting of the Democracy Alliance  —   a network of   Democratic campaign donors  —   at the Mandarin Oriental hotel in Washington the week after the election, Senator Elizabeth Warren delivered an emotional address, excoriating the party for losing its way. One attendee paraphrased her speech to me: “People want someone to fight for them  —   that’s why they voted for Donald Trump. He might not actually do it, but he said he would fight for them. On trade, in American politics, we’ve gotten where we either look like we’re all about free trade without any empathy for people who have lost their jobs, or we’re rabid  . We need to build a policy in between. In 2016, we did not come out clear. When we are clear about what we believe, when we fight for people, we’ll win. ” To beat pugilistic   populism, maybe you needed pugilistic   populism. Reid brought Warren onto the Democratic Senate leadership team in 2014, and she was one of the people he most trusted to keep the Senate caucus on its bearings through the difficult weather ahead. Shortly before Thanksgiving, he summoned Warren to the minority leader’s office. When she arrived, the room was littered with art supplies on an easel was a   portrait of Reid that would be unveiled at his retirement party the following month. Its subject was preoccupied with the future of the party to which he had dedicated decades of his life. Reid told Warren she needed to think seriously about running for president in 2020. “He was worried in November,” Warren told me recently. “For me, it was so important to make clear: We will fight back  —   we will fight back. We’re not here to make this normal. ” Warren believed that the Democrats’ first postelection battle should be over the   Cures Act, a $6. 3 billion   funding bill then before the Senate, which she argued gave away too much to the pharmaceutical industry and would weaken drug regulations. At a Nov. 28 meeting of the party’s Senate leadership team, she argued that the Democrats should negotiate harder than they had on the bill. But the idea was dead on arrival Trump was not in office yet, and the Obama administration supported the legislation, which among other things would finance the Cancer Moonshot initiative that Joe Biden planned to make his life’s work after leaving office. Warren crusaded against the bill on the Senate floor anyway, but only two Democrats joined her in voting against it. It was a minor fight, but an illuminating one. From one perspective, Warren’s move looked quixotic at a time when the party had bigger problems. From another, it was an argument for survival: Whatever unity the Democrats could manage would be worthless without settling what, and who, the party stood for. On the evening of Dec. 14, as Democrats were still struggling to find their way, a Google Doc appeared online titled “Indivisible: A Practical Guide for Resisting the Trump Agenda. ” Its main authors were three young former Democratic congressional staff members whose ambitions were at once modest and sweeping. “We’re not starting an organization, and we’re not selling anything,” they wrote. What they were offering was a blueprint. “The guide is intended to be equally useful for stiffening Democratic spines and weakening   Republican resolve,” they wrote. “We believe that the next four years depend on citizens across the country standing indivisible against the Trump agenda. We believe that buying into false promises or accepting partial concessions will only further empower Trump to victimize our fellow citizens. ” The Twitter account that first circulated the blueprint belonged to Ezra Levin, then a    associate director for federal policy at an antipoverty nonprofit and one of the document’s authors. Shortly after graduating from college, Levin was hired by Lloyd Doggett, a Democratic congressman representing Levin’s hometown, Austin, Tex. and he was working at Doggett’s office on Aug. 1, 2009, when the congressman went to meet his constituents at a Randalls grocery store in South Austin. At the time, Democrats were trying to maneuver the Affordable Care Act through the House of Representatives, and organizers of the nascent Tea Party movement decided to mount a show of force at the town halls that representatives typically held in their districts during the August recess. As Doggett spoke outside the Randalls, a large crowd of demonstrators gathered, armed with DON’T TREAD ON ME flags, signs assailing “socialized health care” and, in one case, a large poster of Doggett’s face augmented with devil horns. “They chased him out into the parking lot,” Levin told me recently. When Doggett tried to leave, the crowd surrounded his car. For the congressional staff members who experienced the uprising that August, the lessons of the Tea Party were mostly tactical, and unambiguous. Representatives live in fear of the wrath of their constituents, but also at a remove from it the legislative process is complicated, blame is easily distributed and Washington is far away. There is an adage on Capitol Hill that five letters from the district about a bill is cause for alarm, and 10 is a   emergency. By those standards, a couple hundred Tea Partyers besieging their elected officials in person was a borderline apocalypse. Republicans had in recent decades outperformed Democrats at this kind of dispersed,   activism. This was in part because the party was more geographically distributed than the Democrats, who were increasingly concentrated in urban areas and interior suburbs. But Democrats had also historically relied heavily on unions and urban party machines to reach voters  —   a support apparatus that receded sharply by the late 20th century. The Republicans, who never had such luxuries, assiduously cultivated their own grass roots  —   an effort whose success has contributed to the deep erosion of the Democrats’ presence in state legislatures (down 23 percent) and governor’s mansions (down nearly 45 percent) since 2008. The most combustible Tea Party town halls were confrontations with Democrats, like Doggett, whose positions on the A. C. A. stood little chance of changing. But these representatives weren’t really the intended audience Republicans were. The shaky,   videos posted to YouTube  —   the first real recognition, in American politics, of the platform’s potential as a stage for agitprop theater  —   and looped endlessly on Fox News were a message to wavering Republicans that obstruction would be rewarded and compromise would be punished. “They were really smart on strategy,” Levin told me: “Focus on your local members, and be defensive in nature. ” Perhaps most important, “They understood that ‘No’ was a complete sentence. ” “Indivisible” was a   précis of the tactics the document’s authors had seen work against them  —   a guide to getting to “No. ” “We’re under no illusion that the resistance will defeat every piece of Trump’s agenda,” Levin told me. The Tea Party lost many battles, including its biggest: “Obamacare was passed.   did pass. Lloyd Doggett did vote for health care. But it did slow down and water down legislation. We didn’t get card check for unions. We didn’t get cap and trade. We didn’t get a lot of things. ” If the Indivisible Guide was a blueprint for a movement, it was an unusual one, bearing little resemblance to liberal or   movements of the past. It called for no ideological remaking of the Democratic Party, no housecleaning of the establishment, no   of the bums  —   or at least not the Democratic ones. Its authors weren’t political outsiders they were members of Washington’s mainstream Democratic professional class. The document presented not just a strategy for standing up to Trump but also an argument for sidestepping the party’s most divisive internal conflicts. It offered a way of thinking about resisting the Trump administration that set aside the debate over what kind of party the Democrats should be. “This is not a panacea,” the authors wrote, “nor is it intended to stand alone. ” It was not a policy agenda, and that was the point. “The Tea Party took root in 2009, focused on fighting against every proposal coming out of the new Democratic administration and Congress. This focus on defense rather than policy development allowed the movement to avoid fracturing. Tea Party members may not have agreed on the policy reforms, but they could agree that Obama, Democrats and moderate Republicans had to be stopped. ” Within two days of Levin’s initial tweet, the guide was enthusiastically circulated by Democratic old hands (like Robert Reich, Bill Clinton’s first labor secretary) liberal journalists (New York magazine’s Jonathan Chait) and celebrities (George Takei, Miranda July). When the authors set up a proper website, it was viewed more than five million times in its first month  —   a testament to how closely the guide mirrored where Democratic voters already were. Demonstrators flocked to impromptu protests in the days immediately after the election, prompting Trump to fume on Twitter less than two days after his victory: “Just had a very open and successful presidential election. Now professional protesters, incited by the media, are protesting. Very unfair!” Five days before Trump’s inauguration, congressional Democrats  —   aided by Bernie Sanders, who deployed the formidable email list he built during his presidential campaign  —   held rallies in defense of the Affordable Care Act across the country, in some cases drawing thousands of demonstrators. What the crowds lacked for now, however, was any particular focal point besides the simple fact of Trump’s presidency and what they anticipated it might try to do in its early days. They were a force in search of an object. The first significant chances for Democratic lawmakers to stand against Trump’s presidency in some concrete form were the votes for his cabinet appointments. Five hours after he was sworn in, on Jan. 20, the Senate considered James Mattis, a retired   Marine Corps general, for defense secretary. Democrats broadly considered Mattis to be far from the worst pick for the Pentagon that Trump could have made. As Schumer told me, “He was against torture and got Trump to actually shift. ” The only member of either party to vote against him was Kirsten Gillibrand, New York’s junior Democratic senator. Gillibrand’s stated objection to Mattis was that his appointment would weaken civilian control over the military. She personally forced a   vote on his appointment  —   an opportunity to literally stand up and be counted, as the lone opposition figure  —   which seemed to indicate that she understood the significance of the moment. Gillibrand was initially a moderate Democrat representing an upstate district in the House of Representatives, then almost immediately established herself as one of the most liberal members in the Senate after arriving there in 2009. She was also one of the first senators to grasp the importance, and potential, of the Women’s March, which would descend on Washington the day after the Mattis vote. March organizers say they invited some senators to speak, but Gillibrand came to them asking to be involved. In the days after the Women’s March, the rest of the party began to figure out what Gillibrand had already grasped: Maybe the party’s base wanted the Democrats to act like McConnell. A protest against one aspect of Trump quickly became a protest against all aspects of him. A demonstration in Washington also drew crowds in Louisville, Ky. Boise, Idaho Charleston, S. C. Des Moines. “I lived very personally through the loss in 2000, the Supreme Court decision,” Klain, who was general counsel for Al Gore during that year’s presidential recount, told me. “And the response this time has been nothing like that. There has been genuine   activism  —   not just in the big cities but also everywhere else. ” The Democratic base, at least, had gotten to “No. ” And it expected the Senate Democrats to get there too. The first demonstrations outside Schumer’s Brooklyn apartment building were slightly apologetic affairs. The crowd of about 100 protesters who gathered on Jan. 8 around the   prewar   across the street from Prospect Park carried unequivocal signs: MAKE US PROUD OR WE’LL PRIMARY YOU DON’T CUT DEALS WITH THE DEVIL! But Mark Dunlea of 350Brooklyn, a group that put together the rally, was quick to explain to a reporter from the website DNAInfo that “we see Schumer primarily as an ally. We’re just trying to encourage him to be more aggressive on these issues. It’s not like we’re protesting Schumer  —   we’re urging him to be stronger. ” By the week after Inauguration Day, however, rallies were happening nationwide every Tuesday and had acquired an angrier edge. Trump was issuing a flurry of executive orders: reduced regulations on manufacturing, a pledge to disassemble the Affordable Care Act, advancements of the Dakota Access and Keystone XL pipelines, the end of federal funding for “sanctuary cities”  —   municipalities that limit their cooperation with federal authorities in detaining people suspected of   violations  —   and the   to build his   United   border wall. Then, on the afternoon of Friday, Jan. 27, the White House announced it was immediately blocking all travel to the United States by citizens of seven   countries. The next evening, thousands of demonstrators converged on international airports around the country as travelers who were caught up in the ban languished behind security cordons. Some Democratic lawmakers who were back in their districts for the weekend joined them. Warren was at Boston’s Logan International Airport, red megaphone in hand. Cory Booker was at the Alfalfa Club dinner  —   a cozy Washington institution that Trump skipped but several White House officials were, reportedly, attending  —   when his chief of staff called him from Dulles International Airport. “I basically bolted,” Booker told me. “I mean, just compare: Who do I want to be standing with?” By 11:45 p. m. he was in the terminal, his tuxedo jacket exchanged for a sweater, addressing the protesters: “This is going to be a long, arduous and tough fight. And let me tell you right now: We have to be determined to continue the fight. ” The following afternoon, when a crowd of 10, 000 gathered to protest in Manhattan’s Battery Park, the first person in line to address the demonstrators, after the rally organizers, was Chuck Schumer. Taking the microphone, Schumer led the crowd in an old standby of a chant  —   “A people united will never be divided!”  —   and, somewhat tentatively, raised his fist. A couple near where I was standing, next to the stage, started laughing. It was a strange thing to see: Schumer was at the barricades, but Schumer was not really a barricades kind of guy. “What we’re talking about here is life and death for so many people,” he intoned, and waved his arm in the direction of the Statue of Liberty, glinting in the distance over his shoulder. “What we’re talking about here is that beautiful lady in the harbor  —   and what America is all about. ” Schumer’s presence at the rally suggested just how quickly, and definitively, the politics of the moment had been settled. In the week since the Women’s March, Trump’s executive orders had confirmed liberals’ worst fears of his intentions and the helplessness of congressional Democrats to stand in his way. And by the end of that week all four cabinet appointees under consideration  —   Mattis Secretary of Homeland Security John Kelly Mike Pompeo, director of the Central Intelligence Agency and Nikki Haley, ambassador to the United Nations  —   sailed through their confirmation votes with no serious opposition. Schumer, in particular, had become a target of outrage. He had not only declined to rally his caucus against the cabinet nominees, but he had also voted for all four of them himself. As he was speaking, I heard a burst of effusive applause and cries of “Senator! Senator!” coming from behind me. I turned and saw, gliding through the scrum in the direction of the stage, the bald dome of Cory Booker’s head. He was beaming, obliging fans with   and back slaps. By some measures, Booker’s voting record in the Senate placed him a couple of clicks to the right of Schumer. But Booker voted no on Kelly and Pompeo, and Schumer did not. Booker was at the airport protests the night before, and Schumer was not. “My middle name is Ellis  —   Charles Ellis Schumer,” Schumer was saying. “I was named after Uncle Ellis, who was named after Ellis Island. I named my daughter’s middle name Emma, after Emma Lazarus, and what she said 100 years ago that’s emblazoned on that beautiful statue  —   ” “Vote no on Sessions!” a handful of people around me were chanting now. Jeff Sessions, Schumer’s Senate colleague, would be up for a confirmation vote as attorney general the following week. “Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to be free, the wretched refuse of your teeming shore  —   ” “Chuck loves Trump! Chuck loves Trump!” the hecklers chanted. “Don’t vote for one of them!” a woman next to me yelled. After Schumer yielded the stage to Gillibrand  —   “She voted no!” another woman near me shouted approvingly  —   he started making his way through the crowd, right into what happened to be a particularly dense pocket of his detractors. “Put ’em up, everybody!” he said, grinning, offering his hands for  . “Put ’em up for our immigrants!” “Vote no, Senator,” someone yelled. “Vote no!” “I’m no on DeVos,” Schumer said. “No on Tillerson. No on Mulvaney. No on Carson. No on Mnuchin. No on all of them!” (He had, in fact, already announced he was voting against Betsy DeVos, Rex Tillerson and Mick Mulvaney  —   the prospective secretaries of education and state and head of the Office of Management and Budget, respectively.) “Why did you confirm Haley and Mattis?” someone demanded. “Grow a spine, Chuck!” a   trimly mustachioed man screamed, practically in Schumer’s ear, his voice cracking: “Grow a spiiiiiiiine!” A scruffy young man, perched in the crook of a tree, began leading a chant: “Grow a spine, Chuck! You must obstruct!” Schumer is one of those politicians who seem to feed on the attention of a crowd, even a largely hostile one, and he pressed on gamely, smiling and shaking hands, pointing in the direction of the occasional familiar face: “Hey Dave, nice to see you!” He was almost out to the street, the crowd around him thinning, when a   woman in a “pussy hat” called out, in a Brooklyn accent nearly as thick as Schumer’s, “What about the first four votes?” Schumer stopped, a hint of a smile on his face, as if intrigued by the specificity of the harangue. “Would you have voted against Mattis?” he asked. “Everything they do. ” “He’s the only one who came out against torture. ” “So it’s a defensive vote?” “Yeah. ” “So we’re going to keep figuring out who’s a relief?” “No, no, no  —   all the other bad ones, we’re going against. ” He swept off up the block with his aides, a man trying to figure out how to be reasonable in deeply unreasonable times. The next cabinet vote, as it happened, was for DeVos, a nominee whom Democrats considered as vulnerable as she was objectionable. In   Schumer wrote to McConnell demanding that certain conditions be met  —   only two cabinet votes a week, and all background checks by the Office of Government Ethics completed before the confirmation hearings  —   or else he would lead his caucus in opposing eight of the nominees, including DeVos. Two Republicans, Susan Collins of Maine and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, had announced their opposition to DeVos. One more no vote would sink the nomination. The Democrats called for an   marathon debate of DeVos’s nomination leading up to the vote on Feb. 7. It wasn’t a filibuster  —   Reid had done away with those for cabinet nominees in 2013  —   but a kind of  : an effort to draw attention to the vote in hopes of further overloading the Senate office buildings’ phone lines and nudging off the fence one of several Republican senators who had been identified, perhaps wishfully, as potentially persuadable. It was also an unsubtle challenge to Senate Democrats: the first moment since the airport protests for the party to stand up and stand together. As they held the floor Monday night and through the early hours of Tuesday, the senators stood in front of the   cameras and read off messages from constituents, urging them to send more to their Republican colleagues before the noon vote. By Monday evening the hashtag #HoldTheFloor was trending on Twitter, accompanied by emoji of praying hands, by inspirational quotes, by photos of Nelson Mandela or of Hodor from “Game of Thrones. ” It was odd, amid the online clamor, to arrive at the Capitol shortly before 2 a. m. and find it   quiet, nearly empty. The Democratic senators filed in one at a time, spoke for an hour to the rotating crew of stenographers and left. Brian Schatz, a young senator from Hawaii, was waiting for his turn to speak and checking Twitter on his phone. He had voted for the first four nominees but then loudly declaimed against others. Shortly after the travel ban, he tweeted: “I’ve never been a     guy. But I do think it’s time to march on the street. ” After an hour, the camera cut away, and a mildly   Tim Kaine ambled onto the floor to take his turn. “Timmy!” Schatz exclaimed. “Are you going to speak for, like, an hour without notes?” Kaine grinned. “I’ve got three pages,” he said. The Senate chamber has the oxygenated,   atmosphere of a casino on a slow night, the same woozy contextlessness. Sitting in the   press gallery as the clock inched toward 4 a. m. I began to have the strange sensation of not knowing exactly what I was watching. The Democrats, it was clear by then, would lose this fight. But the point of the fight was to show that they would fight, to generate the affirming images and video clips that were cascading through   social media, demonstrations of the efficacy of a resistance whose   prospects rested largely on the impression that Democratic lawmakers were hearing, and responding to, its demands. “Fourteen Democrats voted for Mike Pompeo,” Ezra Levin, the Indivisible Guide   told me. “This was a man who slandered Muslims, was open to torture, and 14 Democrats voted for him! That’s why you saw people outside Dianne Feinstein’s office, outside of Schumer’s office, Amy Klobuchar’s office. The base wants them to stand on principle. In the two weeks between Pompeo and DeVos, there were massive protests. And zero Democrats voted for DeVos. Pompeo was an awful pick DeVos was an awful pick. The thing that changed was not the degree of their awfulness, it was that people stood up. ” The next day, at a confirmation hearing for Jeff Sessions, Elizabeth Warren read from a letter that Coretta Scott King wrote in 1986 opposing his judicial appointment, prompting McConnell to censure her with an obscure procedural rule. McConnell’s justification  —   “She was warned she was given an explanation nevertheless, she persisted”  —   quickly evolved into a rallying cry, prompting nearly twice as many Google searches for Warren’s name as her election to the Senate did in 2012. In the next 24 hours, members of the   organization MoveOn raised $300, 000 for her 2018   campaign, and Sessions was confirmed as the attorney general of the United States. Who could claim this as a victory? Trump? Warren? Both of them? By   spirits in Democratic Washington had palpably lifted. You wouldn’t have described the mood as triumphal it was more as if everyone had emerged from the basement after a tornado to discover that, while the car was upside down somewhere, at least the house was still standing. The travel ban remained marooned, at least temporarily, in the courts. (A redrafted executive order was issued on March 6, but it was unclear if it had fully resolved the legal issues of the first.) Trump’s nominee for labor secretary, the   C. E. O. Andrew Puzder, backed out of consideration for the job in   after the Republicans concluded that they did not have the votes to confirm him. The project of doing away with the Affordable Care Act was still tied up in committee amid disagreements among the Republicans themselves  —   an inevitable consequence, perhaps, of their      opposition effort that the Democrats were now studying. And the infrastructure bill that had threatened to divide Democrats against themselves never materialized there was talk now of it being pushed back to 2018. On Feb. 28, a few hours before Trump was due to give his first speech to Congress, I went to see Schumer in the minority leader’s chambers in the Capitol. The senator was sitting in a leather wingback chair in his shirt sleeves, and he seemed to be in a genuinely upbeat mood. “Things look much better for us and much worse for him than I ever imagined based on the first month,” he told me. The day before, three Republican senators  —   Ted Cruz, Mike Lee and Rand Paul  —   had held out for nothing less than full repeal of the Affordable Care Act. “That’s the three votes they need, even with 52!” Schumer crowed. (The following week, a replacement bill finally began to advance through committees in the House of Representatives, but Paul declared in a Fox News interview that it would be “dead on arrival” in the Senate.) He pointed to the crowds that Indivisible and other groups had turned out in the thousands at town halls across the country the previous week. “Trump is the enemy, and his Republican acolytes  —   not Democrats,” he said. “We’re already beginning to coalesce around that. It was very positive. They throw a few brickbats, fine. This energy is enormous. ” But even as a sort of guarded optimism set in among many Democrats, there was a gloom among the party’s left flank that appeared nearly as thick as it was in November  —   a sense that the party, buoyed by the easy gratification of opposition, was punting on resolving difficult questions, at its own peril. Just before visiting Schumer, I went to see Bernie Sanders in his Capitol Hill office. In a couple of hours, the Vermont senator’s colleagues would be gathering in Senate dining room to share a meal  —   a bipartisan tradition before presidential speeches to Congress. But Sanders did not intend to be among them. “I think I’m going to skip the dinner tonight,” he said. “I’m not in a very convivial mood. I don’t want to pretend. These are very, to my mind, frightening times. ” Since ending his presidential campaign in July, Sanders, who caucuses with the Democrats in the Senate, had been managing the complicated task of redirecting the movement that materialized around his candidacy toward a Democratic Party with which he had a tetchy relationship. Schumer had created a post for him in the party’s Senate leadership, and Sanders had helped mobilize his   network for two rounds of rallies in defense of the Affordable Care Act. But earlier in the week, he said in a CNN interview that “a total transformation of the Democratic Party” was still in order, and that he had also not yet given the D. N. C.  —   which he called the “establishment’s house”  —   access to his campaign email list. “It’s not some magical system,” Sanders told me, disdain dripping off the word “magical. ” “How do we bring in, how do you raise money from, those people? You know what? You’ve got to stand for something. ” I asked him if he thought the Democratic Party knew what it stood for. “You’re asking a good question, and I can’t give you a definitive answer,” he said. “Certainly there are some people in the Democratic Party who want to maintain the status quo. They would rather go down with the Titanic so long as they have   seats. ” In early February, Elizabeth Warren, in a speech to the Congressional Progressive Caucus, warned that while the Democrats were fashioning themselves into an opposition party, that was not enough to solve the problems that put them in the position of becoming an opposition party in the first place. “Men like Donald Trump come to power when their countries are already in deep trouble,” she said. “There are some in the Democratic Party who urge caution. They say this is a tactical problem: ‘We need better data. We need better social media. We need better outreach. We need better talking points.’ Better talking points? Are you kidding me? People were so desperate for economic change in this country that Donald Trump was just inaugurated as president, and people think we need better talking points? What alternative planet are they living on?” When I met Warren a few weeks later, I asked her about the speech, and whether the postelection unity that Trump provided the Democratic Party made her ambitions to reform it easier or harder to realize. “I think it has reminded Democrats we need to run on our values,” she replied, parrying the question. “Because our values are more in line with most of America. ” If you squinted at the bodies packing the streets and the town halls, though, the picture looked an awful lot like the recent past: Here were people drawn together in defense of liberal immigration and refugee policies, reproductive rights, civil liberties and preserving Obama’s policy legacy, and in opposition to a president who was moving against all those things. These were last year’s arguments, only louder. If Trump, as president, seemed unable to let go of his 2016 campaign, the Democrats seemed like they were acting out an improved version of their own  —   the crowds bigger and more unified, the stakes more clearly understood. “There’s more enthusiasm, more energy, more passion now than there was at any point in the 2016 campaign  —   which is both heartening and discouraging, all at the same time,” Guy Cecil, the chairman of Priorities USA, the largest Democratic super PAC, told me. “’u200bI think that’s what a lot of us are seeing and feeling. And we’re trying to figure out the right way for us to respond to it. ” For now, the question was how far “No” could carry the Democrats. The Indivisible Guide, in the three months since Levin first posted the Google Doc, had birthed the organization he and his colleagues had not intended to start, with Levin as the executive director. It had registered more than 5, 800 local affiliate groups, at least two in each of the country’s 435 congressional districts. In February, Priorities USA, which raised $192 million to support Clinton in 2016, announced it was reorienting itself to support   organizing  —   including an investment in online advertising driving people to the Indivisible Guide’s website listing congressional members’ town halls. Schumer, meanwhile, was planning to lead the Democrats against Neil Gorsuch’s Supreme Court nomination, forcing the Republicans to find 60 votes or get rid of the filibuster. If Republicans tried to gut federal funding for Planned Parenthood in a forthcoming budget bill, he told me, he was perfectly willing to filibuster that too. “I think McConnell and Ryan know they can’t shut down the government,” he said. “Because they’re in charge now. ” And Schumer, precisely no one’s idea of a revolutionary, was now, at least in a narrow constitutional sense, the leader of the resistance. On my way out of his new office, I noticed a green marble fireplace and asked him if he’d used it yet. “Oh, man,” he said. “It’s my favorite perk. I live in Brooklyn  —   I never had a fireplace. I’m learning to start fires. ”

3 - Major League Baseball officials are finally addressing something that many fans have complained about for years: the length of games. The average game last season took three hours. Playoff games are even more trying, now often stretching beyond three and a half hours. So what should be done? We invited our reporters and readers to submit proposals. Here’s a selection (add your ideas in the comments section): Major League Baseball wants more action and less downtime during games. That’s probably asking too much, because hitters are paid to work deep counts while pitchers throw harder, with better movement, than ever before. It’s no accident that the number of strikeouts rises every year. The larger issue, of course, is expanding the business, which means attracting more fans. And baseball won’t touch the biggest impediments to that effort, because it would mean less money now. Want to make the game move more quickly? Cut every commercial break by 30 seconds. Want more people to watch in the postseason? Insist that Fox show the League Championship Series on its regular network, not on the    Fox Sports 1. This is most important: Make the World Series appointment viewing, as it was a generation ago. October will mark the 30th anniversary of the last World Series game held in the afternoon. If you want to appeal to young fans in all areas of the country, let them watch at least one World Series game every year before bedtime. They’ll repay that   gesture when they grow up, if baseball can wait that long for the payoff.  —   TYLER KEPNER Boredom is the whole point of baseball, an antidote to the accelerated hysteria of modern life. But if you want to speed it up, why not make the experience as unpleasant as possible, as they do in English soccer games? Make the fans enter through tiny turnstiles surrounded by armed police officers. Make the seats really uncomfortable and humiliate anyone who leaves in the middle of play to get food or go to the bathroom. Encourage people to shout abuses at one another and to chuck garbage onto the field. No kiss cams. No   stretch. You want to sing “Take Me Out to the Ball Game,” or, worse, “Sweet Caroline”? Do it on your own time. Anyone who attempts to propose to his or her partner via the Jumbotron will be ejected from the game and banned for life. As for the players: No relaxing. No chatting. No being nice to your opponents. No doing that thing where you waste time knocking the dirt out of your shoes with your bat for good luck, or whatever. You’re hit by a   your   from an open wound? Suck it up. Cap the games at five innings. Make sure at least 75 percent of the crowd is in a vile temper by the end of the game. If the score is tied, the winner should be determined by penalty kicks.  —   SARAH LYALL Ban all mound visits except when using one of three allotted timeouts per game. Imagine a basketball player has just entered the action. The buzzer sounds and she walks onto the court. But before play resumes, the coach strolls to midcourt to discuss strategy with her. A preposterous idea, of course, but that happens in baseball every time there is a pitching change, and often when there is not. The relief pitcher was just sitting in the bullpen spitting sunflower seeds for the last two hours with a telephone hookup to the dugout five feet away. Talk to him before he goes in. Now, picture a soccer goalie halting play to walk 30 yards upfield and chat about tactics with a teammate. Everyone waits until the discussion ends and play resumes. But two minutes later the goalie stops play again to walk upfield again and talk to the same teammate, and never has to ask for a timeout. That’s what catchers do with regularity. But there is no need for it. They have signs. If they can’t keep the signs straight, then practice more. That should be on them, and not on the fans who suffer through the endless mound visits.  —   DAVID WALDSTEIN O the interminable glory of  ! O the joyous expectation that, for the willing surrender of a mere coin, we might see a match between the respective nines of New York and Chicago that could last to the End of Days! Imagine: Our sainted Christy Mathewson, “the Christian Gentleman,” twirling against those shifty   triplets, Tinker and Evers and Chance  —   forever. Be still my sclerotic heart. Alas, this cannot be. Our children have been raised without proper discipline (I, for one, am grateful to my dear pater for having once tied me to a tree after my refusal to eat a tomato that mater had so lovingly stewed). As a result, our youth lack the necessary patience for   so eager are they to return to their wireless devices and motorcars and  . Now the august custodians of our national pastime are forced to consider changes to the game’s sacred text. To which I say: Bosh! Forgive me, dear readers of the female persuasion, for my coarse language. But this cannot stand. Your humble scribe suggests the following. Make the distracting billboards along the outfield walls smaller. Order dawdling batsmen to step into the box  —   like men!  —   or pay the consequences of a first pitch thrown in their absence. Prohibit the spitting, the tugging of nether regions and other unseemly habits that waste time and offend refined sensibilities. We must address these matters posthaste, before some contraption of illumination is invented that leads to this game of sunshine being played at night. Then all will be lost it truly will be the End of Days.  —   D. FRANCIS BARRY Part of baseball’s charm is the quirks: No two games are the same. But long ones can leave an unfavorable impression on at least some fans, so here are some ideas on how to shave off some time. First, instant replay needs refinement. The time it takes for a manager to signal for a review, or for the umpires to rule on a play, needs to be shortened. Second, games can turn painfully slow in September, when rosters expand from 25 players to as many as 40. With so many relievers suddenly at their disposal, managers start to change pitchers with every batter. But the game should not be played by one set of rules for five months and then a different set in the final month. Perhaps allow teams to choose up to, say, 28 active players per game in September, but not 38. Finally, a more radical idea: Cut down on television commercial breaks, especially when they are longer during national broadcasts. Keep the flow of the game constant, and make up for the lost revenue by putting advertisements on the jerseys, as they do in soccer and will next season in the N. B. A.  —   JAMES WAGNER Ban all   armor and padding on batters  —   it’s an unfair advantage and wastes thousands of minutes as straps are adjusted between pitches. Prohibit any hitter from leaving the batter’s box once an   commences, except for obvious, debilitating injury (feeling uncomfortable at the plate does not count). The penalty for stepping out: A strike is called. Do it twice in one  ? Take a seat  —   automatic strikeout. Institute a pitch clock and strictly enforce it (a ball is called if the time expires). Any pitcher going over the clock more than five times is ejected, as with fouling out of a basketball game. Stipulate in the umpires’ union contract that each ump gets a $500 bonus for every game that ends in less than 2 hours 40 minutes. The bonus is $1, 000 for games ending in under 2 hours 25 minutes, and the entire umping crew gets the next weekend off, with pay, for games lasting less than two hours.  —   BILL PENNINGTON Enough about the idiosyncratic habits that obviously slow the game down, but are also part of the game’s natural appeal and help build drama. My advice is to shorten the game. No, I mean, really shorten the game. Reduce it to seven innings from nine. Beyond the time saved, think of the benefits in eliminating two innings. Starting pitchers would throw far fewer pitches, needing to only go four innings to record a victory. The scourge of serious arm and shoulder injuries would very likely diminish. Not having to rely on   mediocrity before getting to the   studs would also quicken the pace of games. Many games might take between two and two and a half hours, or the time it takes to play most soccer and basketball games. Games starting at 7 in the evening would be over by 9:30, making it easier for fans on work and school nights. After the seventh inning, everyone could get up, stretch and go home.  —   HARVEY ARATON Baseball is timeless, and often endless: enduring truths my friends and I came to appreciate as Mets fans in the empty upper decks of Shea Stadium in the early 1980s. Whenever those terribly played games got too long, copious inhalation helped along our Zen appreciation. Ah, the color schemes.   …     My mind is clearer now. So I’ll acknowledge that I like pitch and innings clocks. If batters haven’t adjusted gloves and cups, it’s too late to start once they step into the batter’s box. I’d limit coaching trips to the mound. Otherwise, leave the beautiful game alone. I don’t expect I will convince Commissioner Rob Manfred to put a sock in it. He is that neighbor puttering around his garage, tinkering with an old lawn mower. So here’s a thought: Forget putting a greased pig of a runner at second base in extra innings, and instead call the owners and general managers and urge them to hire blacks and Latinos and women. He’ll feel virtuous and his deeply white and male sport will benefit.  —   MICHAEL POWELL Enough of these suggested baby steps and timid tweaks to make baseball games shorter. It’s like trying to make a marathon markedly shorter by making it 26 miles, instead of 26. 2. Thanks for nothing. What baseball needs are a few spectacular changes to make it not only faster, but also more appealing to young fans whose attention spans have melted into the abyss of their iPads. Let’s get rid of the fourth ball, too. Let’s use a chain saw instead of a scalpel and say three strikes, three balls. Also, there should be no more free passes in this new world of speed baseball. Every foul ball would be counted as a strike. Make those changes, and the marathon becomes not much more than a 10K, just with hot dogs and beer, of course.  —   JULIET MACUR People keep looking for innovative ways to speed up the game, but baseball was played briskly for 100 years, so looking to the past may offer more answers. Specifically, we could look to April 16, 1993, when Mark Hirschbeck, a veteran umpire, decided there was someplace he would rather be than standing behind a catcher in San Francisco’s notoriously chilly Candlestick Park. With two outs in the ninth inning and one strike against him, Atlanta’s Ron Gant called for time and stepped out of the batter’s box. Unfortunately for Gant, Hirschbeck did not honor the request. Gant defiantly strode away from the plate and Hirschbeck, who perhaps had movie tickets or a late dinner engagement, ordered Rod Beck to start pitching. The Giants’ closer was happy to oblige, firing in another strike as Gant frantically raced back to the plate. There were plenty of words exchanged, but Beck ultimately retired Gant on a   to preserve a   victory. Laugh all you want about the thought of pitchers letting things rip regardless of whether the batter is in the box, but that game was over in 2 hours 16 minutes, and Gant probably thought twice for the rest of his career about calling a timeout.  —   BENJAMIN HOFFMAN I don’t want less baseball. I want less nonbaseball. Stepping out of the batter’s box to call a timeout, peer vaguely down the   line or scratch or adjust oneself is not baseball. Stay in the box. Pitchers aren’t blameless, either. Fondling the rosin bag or chatting with your catcher is not baseball. Pitch the ball. A visit to the mound? Let’s not. If you want to make a pitching change, just sound an air horn or something, have the pitcher leave the mound and have the new one come in. And he gets three   pitches, not eight. Come on, you’ve done this before! Vigilant and rigorous eradication of nonbaseball will give us the same dose of baseball in far less time.  —   VICTOR MATHER Several of our readers defended the game and its slow pace, claiming that the problem lay with the attention span of today’s viewers. Here are some of the best comments: Fix baseball? Fix baseball? I’ve got news for you. Baseball doesn’t need fixing! It is just about perfect the way it is. Oh, you in a hurry? Need to get back to the office? Well, then you don’t belong at a baseball game. What are you? From the MTV generation? Shorten the game? Please. You don’t go to a baseball game because you’re in a hurry. You go to a baseball game to relax and watch how it all unfolds. One of the great things about baseball is that there is no clock. You get to chill out, have a conversation or two, and take what amounts to a  . The game doesn’t need shortening and those who think it does need to go to a basketball game. Or a football game. Or any other sport with a clock, so you can make sure not to miss your dental appointment. Now, leave it alone!   —   Bill Leeman, San Rafael, Calif. **** As a practicing Buddhist, I try to live in the present moment at every moment. A slow baseball game allows me the opportunity to meditate between pitches, compose my soul with the personnel changes on the field, calm my feelings with foul balls and intentional walks, and generally muse about life, its vicissitudes and joys, throughout a   game. And how I miss the doubleheaders! May I suggest therapy for those sorry, frantic fans who have lost touch with their inner selves? Go to England and watch a cricket Test match. Go to Norway and watch their “Slow TV. ” Life is short. The calmer you are, the slower things are, the more life you have. Don’t fix baseball, FIX YOUR SOULS! Breathe!  —   David Glidden **** Why does baseball need fixing? Baseball isn’t checkers, it’s chess! It feasts on strategy. The visits to the mound the stepping out of the box the examination of the ball, the     tosses  —   all of it gives us the chance to restart our thoughts about how the next half inning is going to play out. The pitcher’s toss to hold a man on base provides an opportunity for something exciting to happen that can change the game. The same is true for throwing four intentional balls from the mound to the catcher. One of those pitches can go astray, or possibly be close enough to the strike zone to allow a batter to swing  —   and hit the ball to an unprepared second baseman or left fielder or whomever. Baseball is a great game the way it started. Get rid of the d. h.! That was the biggest mistake  —   and took all the fun out of the American League. Otherwise, LEAVE BASEBALL ALONE! Not every game needs to be played for television viewing.  —   Barbara Ames, Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla. The majority of our respondents agreed that baseball was too slow and offered  their opinions on how to fix it. Here is a selection from the submissions we received: If you accept that the problem with M. L. B. is that it moves too slowly and that the exciting moments are too few and far between, and that it takes too long to play, then I would fix it by borrowing from other versions of the game and other leagues: 1. Shorten the game to seven innings (like various youth and scholastic leagues) 2. Start hitters with a   count (like some recreational softball leagues) 3. Allow players to “foul out” with a   count (like some recreational softball leagues) 4. Move the fences in (similar to the N. H. L. effectively making goals bigger by making goalie pads smaller) to have even more home runs, and 5. Reduce the number of players on the field (like the N. H. L. ’s    overtime) to create more space for base hits.  —   Jacob Ritvo, Palo Alto, Calif. **** Fewer commercial breaks. I feel like this is easily the worst addition to baseball games and the worst contributor to wasted time and the No. 1 reason why I don’t watch baseball on TV and don’t love going to more than a few games a year. Commercials add another 45 minutes to an hour to a game! Alas, I feel that even if changes are made to the rules, nothing will change about ridiculous advertising time and thus games will still stay the same length. I’m there to watch baseball. That is why I bought a ticket  —   to view a live sporting event. I did not purchase a ticket to wait around for a commercial break on TV. And shorten pitcher changes and make the pitchers and batters go faster.  —   Mattie Vukmir, San Francisco **** Outlaw batting gloves, which slow down the game because of the ritualistic ripping and repositioning of the Velcro on them. They don’t loosen up that fast, dudes! This is also associated with the batters stepping out of the box after every pitch, a practice that should be prevented.  —   Gabriella Howard, Augusta, Me. **** Start every inning with a man at second base. Have that man be Bartolo Colon.  —   Howard Cole, Los Angeles **** You know how fans boo every time a pitcher throws over to first base in a halfhearted attempt to pick off a runner? Limit the number of times a pitcher can do that in any given   with a runner on first or third base. Say, the pitcher can attempt a pickoff throw twice, but then must throw home. If a runner is stealing second, the catcher has the better vision and ability to throw him out than the pitcher does, and if he’s stealing home, well   …     he’s probably not Jackie Robinson.  —   Max Rettig, New York **** After 11 innings, the home team can send up their best slugger (even if he was in the game and taken out). The visiting team can send out the pitcher of their choice for a   home run derby. If the home team hits a home run, they win the game. If they don’t, the visiting team wins the game.  —   Robert Azar, Brooklyn **** Every time there’s a pause in the game (a manager’s visit to the mound, a catcher’s visit to the mound, replay review, etc.) that’s long enough, the stadium plays music, and all players on the field not involved in the specifics of the incident must dance. I figure this will either result in fewer pauses because players don’t want to dance, or will make the pauses much more entertaining.  —   Rebecca Thorsness, Providence, R. I. **** Abolish the abominable   rule in the majors and minors.  —   Nelson Hernandez, Austin, Tex. **** How is it that a baseball game used to take two hours to complete and now can take up to four hours? The easy answer is to blame the players. And certainly they deserve some of it. But I believe that before commercial TV got involved, the time between innings was a lot shorter than it is now. With 17 changeovers in a full   game, that really lengthens a game. Of course, there is no such thing as a complete game for a pitcher anymore, and managers are prone to add to commercial timeouts with three pitching changes for each team. But before we add a clock on the players, let’s think about putting the clock on those who are off the field  —   managers and TV broadcasters.  —   Jeff Byron, Los Altos, Calif. **** If no one is on base, let the batter run in either direction  —   i. e. to first base or third. All batters and runners who follow have to go in the same direction until the bases are empty. This will bring an element of suspense and interest to the game.  —   Mark Flannery, Fullerton, Calif. **** To improve offense, eliminate radical shifts by fixing the locations of fielders within zones until the ball reaches the plate. Inspect   photos so the zones match what Ted Williams faced in 1941. Violations are errors.  —   Robert LaRose, Taiwan **** Relegation! Adopt the global soccer system of sending down the worst teams and bringing up the best from the level right below. This would inspire   teams to compete with the larger markets rather than muddle along for decades in third or fourth place. In addition, it would bring pro baseball to smaller markets and give those cities a taste of major league talent.  —   Kurt Gardner, Brooklyn **** Some of us like watching professional soccer in part because we know it will be a   game. You can count on it. Not so with M. L. B. Isn’t it ironic (moronic?) that M. L. B. officials are quoted as saying that they can’t shorten the breaks between innings because of the ad revenue that would be lost. So if I understand this, they’d rather have the dollars than the fans. What a strategy. How about this strategy  —   put the customers first by shortening the game, and that in turn would increase viewership and attendance and eventually maybe even increase revenues.  . This should be all about improving the customer experience. Once you do that, the data shows, you increase your revenues.  —   Dennis Stern, Lyme, N. H. **** Award multiple runs for gigantic home runs, much as the basketball   shot. This wouldn’t speed up the game, but it would add some excitement.  —   Steven Sherwood, San Francisco **** What if the batting order were eliminated? What if a manager could send up a particular player to bat as many times as he wanted in a game in whatever order he wanted? A batter could even get up consecutive times if he didn’t reach base. Presumably the team’s best hitters would get up over and over  —   maybe the best six would only see   and the other players on the team would be defensive specialists.  —   Alan Stricoff **** Legalize the use of certain   drugs, to be monitored by medical professionals. The drugs to be legalized should focus on maintaining health and recovering from injury. Sure, we’d have to consider stats and records from prior eras as distinct from current player accomplishments. But today, it appears we are at the point where “  drugs” is almost synonymous with “medical advancement. ” These guys play a lot of baseball. Healthier, better players spread across the league would be great for the game. And, yeah, keep the hitters in the box between pitches, too. It’s ridiculous already.  —   Dan Davidow, New Jersey **** Baseball is the sport where superstars have the least impact at the most crucial times. In every other sport the star can hit the big shot, throw the touchdown pass or score the goal when it counts. Here is my idea, and it’s radical for sure. In the eighth or ninth inning, the team at bat, if losing or tied, can advance the batting order back to the top of the order (one time only). We need more offense. More excitement. Let the best players put the bat in their hands against the best relievers at the most important times.  —   Doug Tumen, Woodstock, N. Y. **** Basically, I have only one problem with baseball that stops me from viewing a game at certain times, and that’s while I’m eating. And that problem is SPITTING! SPITTING! SPITTING! I don’t enjoy watching grown men, nor anyone for that matter SPITTING! It’s not pleasant, it’s not cool as most players and   think it is and it’s certainly not  . TV producers have an affinity for showing it but it needs to stop.  —   William McGrady, Piscataway, N. J. **** Easy fix: have one lineup for offense and one for defense (like the N. F. L. ). M. L. B. will get more hitting, more base running, more scoring   …     more excitement!  —   Larry Sternbach, Marlboro, N. J. **** One sure (and radical) way to speed up the game would be to make ALL foul balls be strikes no matter the count. If there are two strikes on the batter and he fouls a pitch off, he’s out.  —   Paul Morrison, Boston **** The biggest improvement M. L. B. could make is to institute an electronic strike zone. Aside from providing ultimate consistency and fairness to both pitchers and batters (and fans) the electronic strike zone would eliminate the hidden,   gamesmanship practiced by pitchers, batters, catchers and bench jockeys as they try to influence the umpires’ calls. Statisticians at Stanford have determined that   umpires are biased by game situations when calling balls and strikes (the same   pitch with the bases loaded is more likely to be called a strike than ball four).  —   Andreas Lord, Brookline, Mass. **** Why don’t we enforce the rules that already exist? Batters are supposed to stay in the box, and mound visits are limited to 30 seconds. The umps and baseball need to actually, and consistently, enforce this. What’s the point of the rule if no one pays attention to it?  —   Erika Crawford, Washington **** 10 contemplated rule changes for 2017 that would revolutionize the sport (time saved is per game): 1. After a home run is hit, the batter just touches home plate without running the bases. Average time saved: 98 seconds. 2. A pitcher gets one free strike per inning. Thus, a     count with the bases loaded and two outs becomes an inning ending   with a wave of the hand. Average time saved: 21 minutes. 3. If a team is ahead by more than four runs in the seventh inning or beyond, they forfeit their right to bat. Average time saved: 36 minutes. 4. One batter on the opposing team can be designated as ineligible for any game. The same player cannot be chosen more than once per series. Average time saved: 38 minutes. 5. The third inning, and any extra inning, is three balls and two strikes instead of four and three. Average time saved: 39 minutes. 6. Managers are eliminated. Average time saved: 56 minutes. 7. Home teams get to call games two hours after the first pitch is thrown. The dilemma is the team must make this choice before the game starts. Average time saved: 58 minutes. 8. One fan, coming to the park with two screaming children, is chosen to decide when he has had enough and wants to leave. At that point, everyone, including the players, has to go home. Average time saved: 78 minutes. 9. There can be only one pitching change per inning, and none in the second, fifth and eighth innings. If a game lasts more than 10 innings, the opposing squad gets to designate the pitcher( s) for the 11th and 12th innings. Average time saved: 81 minutes. 10. The season is reduced to 12 games. Average time saved: infinity, as baseball dies.  —   Robert Nussbaum, Fort Lee, N. J. **** Limit visits to the mound by players and coaches a team must use them the same way football, basketball, hockey teams use timeouts. A batter must always have one foot in the batter’s box. Batters must learn to stop fidgeting around they are professionals, not    kids. Shortstop and third baseman must be on the   side of second base, second basemen and first basemen must be on the   side of second base. Outfielders must stay in the outfield. This is before the pitch. Anything else is an illegal defense. Learn from basketball. This has nothing to do with the speed of the game but make “high socks” fashionable.  —   Vincent, Encinitas, Calif. **** Require all M. L. B. teams to designate a certain number of games (one per month, say) as “Youth Games. ” In a Youth Game, all tickets  —   and at least certain concessions  —   purchased by someone under a certain age (say, 16) would be STEEPLY discounted  —   say, by 90 percent or so. And, ALL tickets should be set aside for those games, so a box seat that might normally go for $150 would be only $15 and $20   seats would be $2. Teams might also consider ways to subsidize transportation to those games.  —   Ken Landau, Overland Park, Kan. **** One free pickoff attempt per   after that, each pickoff attempt counts as a ball. This will speed up the game and increase excitement with more stolen bases and runs.  —   Rick Dorfman, Boca Raton, Fla. **** Nine innings, nine positions. The players rotate one position each inning, as in volleyball. Players would be better rounded and the disproportionate importance of pitchers would disappear. Then I would watch it with interest.  —   Tom Jones, Boulder, Colo. **** Drop the fourth inning. Nothing ever happens in the fourth so just go from the third to the fifth. You would still have the ninth inning, and we would be there at least 20 minutes sooner.  —   John Connolly, Rockville Centre, N. Y. **** We were a little surprised at how passionate people were about this subject and how much thought they put into it  —   we received nearly 3, 000 submissions. If you would like to see some more ideas about how to fix the game, or why it should be left alone, we’ve published the best of the rest.

3 - In the fall of 2012, a    fisherman and carver named Terry St. Germain decided to enroll his five young children as members of the Nooksack, a federally recognized Native American tribe with some 2, 000 members, centered in the northwestern corner of Washington State. He’d enrolled his two older daughters, from a previous relationship, when they were babies, but hadn’t yet filed the paperwork to make his younger children  —   all of whom, including a set of twins, were under 7  —   official members. He saw no reason to worry about a bureaucratic endorsement of what he knew to be true. “My kids, they love being Native,” he told me. St. Germain was a teenager when he enrolled in the tribe. For decades, he used tribal fishing rights to harvest salmon and sea urchin and Dungeness crab alongside his cousins. He had dozens of family members who were also Nooksack. His mother, according to family lore, was directly descended from a   Nooksack chief known as Matsqui George. His brother, Rudy, was the secretary of the Nooksack tribal council, which oversaw membership decisions. The process, he figured, would be so straightforward that his kids would be certified Nooksacks in time for Christmas, when the tribe gives parents a small stipend for buying gifts: “I thought it was a    situation. ” But after a few months, the applications had still not gone through. When Rudy asked why, at a tribal council meeting, the chairman, Bob Kelly, called in the enrollment department. They told Rudy that they had found a problem with the paperwork. There were missing documents ancestors seemed to be incorrectly identified. They didn’t think Terry’s children’s claims to tribal membership could be substantiated. At the time, Rudy and Kelly were friends, allies on the council. At the long oval table where they met to discuss Nooksack business, Rudy always sat at Kelly’s right. But the debate over whether Rudy’s family qualified as Nooksack tore them apart. Today, more than four years later, they no longer speak. Rudy and his extended family refer to Kelly as a monster and a dictator he calls them pond scum and con artists. They agree on almost nothing, but both remember the day when things fell apart the same way. “If my nephew isn’t Nooksack,” Rudy said in the council chambers, “then neither am I. ” To Rudy, the words were an expression of shock. “It’s fighting words,” he said, to tell someone they’re not really part of their tribe. At stake were not just his family’s jobs and homes and treaty rights but also who they were and where they belonged. “I’ll still be who I am, but I won’t have proof,” Rudy said. “I’ll be labeled a  . So yeah, I take this very personally. ” To Kelly, the words were an admission of guilt, implicating not just the St. Germains but also hundreds of tribal members to whom they were related. As chairman, he felt that he had a sacred duty: to protect the tribe from invasion by a group of people that, he would eventually argue, weren’t even Native Americans. “I’m in a war,” he told me later, sketching family trees on the back of a copy of the tribe’s constitution. “This is our culture, not a game. ” The St. Germains’ rejected application proved to be a turning point for the Nooksack. Separately, the family and the council began combing through Nooksack history, which, like that of many tribes in the United States, is complicated by government efforts to extinguish, assimilate and relocate the tribe, and by a dearth of historical documents. An international border drawn across historically Nooksack lands only adds to the confusion. There were some records and even some living memories of the ancestors whose Nooksack heritage was being called into doubt. But no one could agree on what the records meant. In January 2013, Kelly announced that, after searching through files at the Bureau of Indian Affairs office in nearby Everett, he had reason to doubt the legitimacy of more than 300 enrolled Nooksacks related to the St. Germains, all of whom claimed to descend from a woman named Annie George, born in 1875. In February, he canceled the constitutionally required council meeting, saying it would be “improper” to convene when Rudy St. Germain and another council member, Rudy’s cousin Michelle Roberts, were not eligible to be part of the tribe they’d been elected to lead. A week later, he called an executive session of the council but demanded that St. Germain and Roberts remain outside while the rest of the council voted on whether to “initiate involuntary disenrollment” for them and 304 other Nooksacks, including 37 elders. The resolution passed unanimously. “It hurt me,” Terry St. Germain said later. Even harder was watching the effect on his brother, Rudy. “It took the wind right out of him. ” Two days after the meeting, the tribal council began sending out letters notifying affected members that unless they could provide proof of their legitimacy, they would be disenrolled in 30 days. Word and shock spread quickly through the small,   reservation. The disenrollees, now calling themselves “the Nooksack 306,” hired a lawyer and vowed to contest their expulsion. “I told ’em, ‘I know where I belong no matter what you say,’’u2009” an    woman who, in her youth, had been punished for “speaking Indian” at school, said. “’u2009‘You can’t make me believe that I’m not. ’’u2009” The Nooksacks who want the 306 out of the tribe say they are standing up for their very identity, fighting for the integrity of a tribe taken over by outsiders. “We’re ready to die for this,” Kelly would later say. “And I think we will, before this is over. ” Outside the lands legally known as “Indian Country,” “membership” and “enrollment” are such blandly bureaucratic words that it’s easy to lose sight of how much they matter there. To the 566 federally recognized tribal nations, the ability to determine who is and isn’t part of a tribe is an essential element of what makes tribes sovereign entities. To individuals, membership means citizenship and all the emotional ties and treaty rights that come with it. To be disenrolled is to lose that citizenship: to become stateless. It can also mean the loss of a broader identity, because recognition by a tribe is the most accepted way to prove you are Indian  —   not just Nooksack but Native American at all. Efforts to define Native American identity date from the earliest days of the colonies. Before the arrival of white settlers, tribal boundaries were generally fluid intermarriages and alliances were common. But as the new government’s desire to expand into Indian Territory grew, so, too, did the interest in defining who was and who wasn’t a “real Indian. ” Those definitions shifted as the colonial government’s goals did. “Mixed blood” Indians, for example, were added to rolls in hopes that assimilated Indians would be more likely to cede their land later, after land claims were established, more restrictive definitions were adopted. In the 19th century, the government began relying heavily on blood quantum, or “degree of Indian blood,” wagering that, over generations of intermarriage, tribes would be diluted to the point that earlier treaties would not have to be honored. “’u2009‘As long as grass grows or water runs’  —   a phrase that was often used in treaties with American Indians  —   is a relatively permanent term for a contract,” the Ojibwe author David Treuer wrote in a 2011   for The Times. “’u2009‘As long as the blood flows’ seemed measurably shorter. ” Even for those early rolls, though, determining blood quantum was tricky it was not a measure that tribal people used or something they kept track of. Government agents compiling base rolls in the 1800s sometimes simply guessed at the percentage of Indian blood at the time, anthropologists used feet and hair width as a “scientific” test of blood degree in indigenous tribes. Many traditionalist Indians, known as “irreconcilables” or “blanket Indians,” were so suspicious of the government that they refused to be enrolled at all, making all their descendants unenrollable as well. In 1988 the historian Kent Carter coined a   term for the millions who claim Indian ancestry but who, for a variety of reasons, don’t sort neatly into today’s official boxes: people with mixed tribal heritage people whose ancestors were denied recognition by early government agents or died before registration was complete people whose tribes, in the face of the federal government’s attempts to extinguish them, didn’t maintain the cohesion that same government would later require for recognition. Carter called them the “outalucks. ” Contemporary Indian identity is refracted through a tangled accumulation of   and   understandings of biology and race, as well as several centuries’ worth of conflicting federal policies. The Constitution uses the word “Indian” twice but never bothers to define it. A congressional survey in 1978 found that, in addition to the different requirements used by tribes and individual states, federal legislation defined Native Americans in at least 33 ways. In 2005, one frustrated judge, quoting an earlier decision, described the legal definitions of   as “’u2009‘a complex patchwork of federal, state and tribal law,’ which is better explained by history than by logic. ” Given the web of criteria, courts are sometimes called upon to decide whether individuals, or even tribes, are “authentically” Indian. This has led to weighing things like whether   128ths constitutes a “significant degree” of Indian blood (a federal court ruled in 2009 that it did) whether someone who was “Indian in an anthropological or   sense” was also Indian for the purposes of criminal jurisdiction if his tribe isn’t federally recognized (the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals decided he was not) and whether behaviors like eating fast food and driving cars show that a tribe’s culture had been abandoned and its land rights “extinguished” (in 1991, a Canadian court said that they did the ruling was later overturned). Modern Native Americans  —   who in 2017 are still issued cards by the federal government certifying their “Degree of Indian Blood”  —   are used to, if not necessarily comfortable with, the need to “prove” their identities in ways that may seem strange to people of other ethnicities. Tribes set their own membership requirements, but in order to be recognized by the federal government, they must also prove their historical continuity and have generally hewed to the methods it has established. Tribes have on occasion been warned that federal recognition, and thus their   rights, can disappear if their membership becomes unclear. When, in 1994, the Blackfeet Nation considered doing away with its   requirement, a Bureau of Indian Affairs official warned that a tribe that “diluted” its relationship with its members might find that “it has ‘ ’ its sovereignty away. ” Today, most tribes use direct descent from tribal members listed on historical rolls and blood quantum. For a 2003 book, “Real Indians: Identity and the Survival of Native America,” the Cherokee scholar Eva Marie Garroutte interviewed Native people about what it felt like to be defined in this way. Many said they saw blood quantum as a helpful guidepost and a guard against fraud or against people who identify as Indian without cultural understanding. Others regarded it as odd, even offensive. An Ojibwe man joked that he is also “part white, but I don’t have the papers to prove it. ” A    woman replied, “I don’t like being talked about in a vocabulary usually reserved for dogs and horses. ” Lately, though, old debates about identity have taken a harsh new direction. Loss of tribal acceptance, which was once rare and seldom permanent, has become increasingly common over the last two decades. David Wilkins, a professor of American Indian studies at the University of Minnesota who has followed the phenomenon since the   says there has been a surge in disenrollment that involves between 5, 000 and 9, 000 people in 79 tribes across 20 states. Even the dead have been disenrolled and, in some cases, exhumed from their graves, against tradition and taboo, to have their DNA tested. The ejection of tribal members is most prevalent in small tribes with casinos on their land “per capita” profit shares go further when split fewer ways. Many of the most famous cases have been in California: Following the opening of a new tribal casino in 2003, the Chukchansi, in Coarsegold, disenrolled more than half of approximately 1, 600 tribal members, and battles among factions eventually led to an armed takeover of the casino. But disenrollment also happens where casino money isn’t a major factor (the Nooksack have one casino and another recently closed, but don’t make enough money from gaming to issue per capita payments) or isn’t a factor at all, as in tribes where factions hope to consolidate political power or settle grudges or simply believe that people were mistakenly let in. Robert Williams, chairman of the Indigenous Peoples Law and Policy Program at the University of Arizona, told me that some tribes have recently begun to hire membership consultants to help trim their rolls. “It’s almost become an industry in some parts of Indian Country,” he said. The National Native American Bar Association issued a resolution in 2015 denouncing loss of membership without due process, while the Association of American Indian Physicians warned that such loss of identity could cause serious grief and depression. In general, though, the voices against disenrollment have been few. A 1978 Supreme Court decision, Santa Clara Pueblo v. Martinez, held that, due to its sovereignty, a tribe cannot be sued for discrimination for accepting the children of male members who married outside the tribe but not those of female members who did. It has been widely interpreted as giving tribes the right to determine their membership requirements, even if individual rights are compromised. The Bureau of Indian Affairs, out of respect for sovereignty, has repeatedly declined to intervene in internal membership disputes. Native leaders, leery of inviting scrutiny that could undermine tribal sovereignty, have been reluctant to speak out. “They tend to view any interference in such matters as an intrusion of the thin end of an infinitely expandable wedge against which they must exercise constant vigilance,” writes Garroutte. Ron Allen, the chairman of the Jamestown S’Klallam  —   a Western Washington tribe that disenrolled six members for insufficient blood quantum  —   says that “the topic is rising” and eliciting strong emotions, but it’s not appropriate to tell other tribes what to do: “It would be like Oregon saying to Washington, ‘You’re not managing your affairs properly. ’’u2009” Of the sweeping lands that historically made up Nooksack territory  —   it once stretched from the glaciated heights of Mt. Baker to the rocky shores of Puget Sound  —   the tribe now owns about 2, 500 acres, bought from private owners in the last 50 years. The reservation is centered in Deming, an unincorporated town of a few hundred people, with pockets of tribal housing scattered beyond it. Most Nooksack tribal members do not live on the reservation many of them, or their ancestors, followed opportunities in the more developed southern Sound or in other parts of the country. Adelina   64, lives across the Sound, closer to the Olympic Mountains. A   of Annie George, the common ancestor who unites the Nooksack disenrollees, and a cousin of Rudy and Terry St. Germain’s mother, she was among the first of the 306 accepted as Nooksack decades ago. One afternoon as we sat on her porch watching ships come and go from Seattle, she showed me the letter the tribe sent her in 1983, announcing her new membership. Overhead, a bald eagle wheeled inside, her husband, a painter, made sketches for a portrait of Annie George. He was working from an old, grainy photograph that he wasn’t sure depicted George. A relative found it in a shed, and the features were indistinct. “Once you title something,” he said, laughing, “it is what you say it is. ” After she got her letter of acceptance,   recalled, she was quick to tell her family, and then to write back to the enrollment director: “We were all jubilant, laughing, full of joy, jumping, screaming, crying, and the greatest overwhelming feeling of belonging somewhere. ” She was proud, she wrote, to finally know where she came from, “and prouder still to be a Nooksack Indian. ”   didn’t set out to be a member of the Nooksack tribe. She grew up well south of Nooksack lands, following her parents as they sought work in the fields, orchards and canneries of Washington State. Her father was Filipino and her mother was Indian, raised on a Shxway reserve in British Columbia. Her mother always said she was part Shxway, a Canadian band within the Stolo nation, through her grandfather, and part Nooksack, through her grandmother Annie George. Annie George’s three daughters  —    ’s grandmother and her two aunts  —   all married Filipino farmworkers. The family spoke Halkomelem, a native language that was widely spoken in what is now British Columbia but also in the Nooksack River valley until the   century it eventually largely replaced the original Nooksack language, Lhechalosem. As a child,   would sometimes drive north with her mother to visit family, and they would stop off in Nooksack territory to visit a man they called Uncle Louis. In 1983,   her mother and one of her   decided they wanted to learn more about their heritage. They went to the Bureau of Indian Affairs office in Everett, Wash. and then to the Nooksack enrollment office in Deming, to work on a family tree.  ’s mother told the enrollment director that her grandmother’s name was Annie George, and that her grandmother’s siblings had been named Louis, Amanda, Frank and William. Annie George wasn’t on the family trees the tribe had, and she wasn’t listed on any of the censuses it used, but Louis George was on a Nooksack tribal census from 1942. In a probate document, they found Annie’s name: Four interviewees described her as Louis’s half sister. The enrollment director encouraged the women to apply for membership, and they did. Within a month, the council sent them word that they had been accepted.   was the 777th enrolled member of the Nooksack tribe. Many of her relatives quickly followed. (Some also enrolled, separately, as Shxway.) As more houses became available, more members of the three families moved to reservation lands. Before long, the descendants of Annie George became an influential voting bloc, and their members were being elected to council seats and hired to run tribal offices. While some elders welcomed them, others were skeptical. The sisters had never lived on Nooksack land. Some elders had no memory of them others remembered them visiting but thought of them as Shxway. Kelly heard, indirectly, that elders in British Columbia didn’t remember the sisters’ being born there, but rather, showing up suddenly as young children  —   the beginning of his suspicions that, though they “had teachings,” the sisters weren’t Annie’s real daughters at all but   children she had taken in. Roberts showed me copies of two of the sisters’ birth certificates, reissued later in their lives, listing Annie and her husband as their parents. Other members of the tribe remembered knowing some of the 306 further south in the 1950s, when their families were doing agricultural work at the time, they said, the families identified as Filipino. They certainly hadn’t been around in the 1960s or ’70s, when the tribe was writing its constitution  —   when, as Kelly put it, the council “took a look around at who was here when they passed it, and they wrote their criteria for that, based on who was here  —   this is who Nooksack’s going to be. ” The debate continued into the 1990s, when the tribe did an enrollment audit of one of the three families descended from Annie’s daughters, the Rabangs. They were ultimately found to be enrollable, but not before an ugly confrontation. In 2000, after a number of Rabangs were arrested for smuggling marijuana into the United States from Canada, some elders told The Associated Press that “a clan of outsiders masquerading as Nooksacks” was “controlling tribal government. ” Bob Kelly now calls   and the other first enrollees from her extended family “Trojan horses. ” The Nooksack, as is the case with many tribes, have not always been known by their modern name. Rather, Nooksack, which is also rendered Noxwsá7aq, was the name of one of many villages scattered along what is now called the Nooksack River. When white settlers arrived in the   century, they applied the name of the village to all the people in the valley. Noxwsá7aq translates to “always bracken fern roots,” on which people of the village are said to have subsisted during a time of famine. One tribal member told me that she thinks the name captures something of what it means to be Nooksack. It makes her feel like a survivor. That’s a fair description of Nooksack history, especially in the last few hundred years. For centuries, the people fished their own river valley but also traveled regularly, including to what is now Canada’s Fraser River, to fish for salmon or gather shellfish. They intermarried and formed alliances with their neighbors on both sides of what is now an international border. When white settlers arrived and introduced new diseases, many of the Nooksack died. By some counts their numbers plummeted to 450 from perhaps 1, 200. In the 1855 Treaty of Point Elliot, in which Coast Salish tribes ceded their lands to the federal government in exchange for small reservations and the right to continue fishing, hunting and gathering, the Nooksack received no reservation. Instead, as settlers moved onto their lands, they were told to go live with the Lummi, in their new reservation by the coast. Most refused. Of those who remained, some filed homestead claims on their own lands others scattered in search of a livelihood. For the next hundred years, as far as the federal government was concerned, the tribe essentially ceased to exist. This is not an unusual story. The federal government used the law as “a mighty, pulverizing engine to break up the tribal mass,” as Teddy Roosevelt said to Congress in 1901. He was referring to the General Allotment Act, under which tribally owned land was carved into small parcels and handed out to individuals. It was a huge blow to the stability and sovereignty of tribes: Within 20 years, Native people lost ownership of 90 million acres. It was also the beginning of the government’s reliance on blood quantum to determine Indian status. Those deemed “ ” or less were regarded as more responsible and given more freedom to handle their land. Even many “progressive” reformers saw assimilation into white society as the best way to transform tribal members into citizens. “Kill the Indian in the student so we can save the man!” went the famous slogan of a superintendent at one of the 500 boarding schools that Native children, forcibly separated from their families, were made to attend. Some Nooksack people, unrecognized by the federal government, stayed on their lands and continued to operate as a tribe. In the 1920s, they joined other Northwest tribes to sue the federal government for lands lost in the 1930s, even though they weren’t considered eligible to participate, they voted to accept the Indian Reorganization Act, in which the government backed away from its assimilationist policies and instead encouraged tribes to be   and  . (A decade later the United States ended its    relationships with tribes and returned to promoting assimilation, before changing its policies and pushing   again.) In the 1960s, a committee of Nooksacks opened a bid for federal recognition. They gained title to one acre of land in Deming, the first Nooksack Reservation, in 1970, and full federal recognition in 1973. Like many tribes, they adopted a constitution based on a model that the Bureau of Indian Affairs developed during the reorganization period in the 1930s. The new constitution restricted Nooksack membership to recipients of early land allotments, recipients of a 1965 government settlement or people who appeared on a 1942 tribal census. Their direct descendants could also be enrolled, provided they had “at least   ( ) degree Indian blood. ” The Nooksack weren’t alone in seeing   applicants turn up after the tribe was officially recognized. Ron Allen, the tribal chairman of the Jamestown S’Klallam, told me it was common, in the last decades of the 20th century, for the “  communities” of northwestern tribes to be surprised by a “wave” of people who started coming back to places their families once left. He credits the political advancement of tribes, which made members of the broader society feel that it was “O. K. to be Indian. ” Tribes generally welcomed the new arrivals, he said, but still, “it was like, ‘Where are all these Indians coming from? ’’u2009” The most outspoken critics of disenrollment call it a form of genocide. Others don’t go quite so far but still view the practice as an outgrowth of policies designed to suppress Native American identity  —   “to control us, to assimilate us, and ultimately, to extinguish us,” as John McCoy, a Washington State senator and member of the Tulalip Tribes, neighbors to the Nooksack, wrote in an   for the Indian Country Media Network earlier this year. Robert Williams, of the University of Arizona, argues that disenrollment is a remnant of “colonialism and good   American racism, with Indians left to deal with the mess. ” In a 2015 tweet, Sherman Alexie, the Spokane and Coeur d’Alene author, put it even more emphatically: “Dear Indian tribes who disenroll members, you should be ashamed of your colonial and capitalistic bullshit. ” The first person to reply to Alexie’s tweet  —   thanking him for speaking out when others were silent  —   was Gabe Galanda, a member of the Round Valley Indian tribes in California and the lawyer whom the Nooksack 306 hired to represent them. The next replies came from some of Galanda’s other clients: former members of the Confederated Tribes of Grand Ronde, who were disenrolled in 2014. Grand Ronde was formed in 1857 when the federal government forced at least 27 tribes and bands to leave their homelands, which ranged from California to Washington, and move to a reservation in Oregon. The 86 Grand Ronde disenrollees descend from a man known as Chief Tumulth, who signed one of the treaties that created the reservation. Decades after they enrolled, tribal officials noted that Chief Tumulth failed to appear on the official base roll, made the year it was founded. It was true: He was hanged the year before, by a lieutenant of the U. S. Army. I thought of this last spring as I watched   leaf through old letters and family trees, newspaper clippings and documents. “We didn’t make the laws,” she said. “We just got stuck in the middle. ” After the first disenrollment letters went out to Nooksack members, Galanda appealed to tribal courts and the Department of the Interior and managed to delay the disenrollment hearings. Meanwhile, the 306 tried to make sense of what documents they could find to illuminate their past. They had no birth certificate for Annie, so they turned to old censuses and to   church records kept by the Archdiocese of Vancouver, marking the sacraments of birth, marriage and death. They found that Annie’s birth mother, Marie Siamat, was buried in December 1875, two days after giving birth to Annie, and that her father (variously recorded as Chief Matsqui, George Kot kro itmentwh, George Roelkwemeldon, George Tekwomclko, George Matsqui and so on) remarried a woman named Madeline Jobe. Indian censuses taken during Annie’s childhood repeatedly recorded her living with George and Madeline. Michelle Robert’s grandmother remembers her mother, Annie, referring to Madeline as the woman who raised her and as “Mother. ” The 306 think this is compelling evidence Madeline adopted Annie. The council remains unconvinced. Kelly says that citing Madeline as an ancestor  —   their only tie to recognized base rolls  —   was a blatant lie. If Madeline didn’t count, the family responded, they should still qualify for membership under Section H of the Nooksack constitution, which allows the enrollment of “persons who possess at least ¼ Indian blood and who can prove Nooksack ancestry to any degree. ” Records indicate that Matsqui was considered a Nooksack village even after the Canadian border was established to the south, and Matsqui George was a chief of the village. In a U. S. census from 1910, Louis George indicated that both his parents, Madeline and Matsqui George, were Nooksacks from Washington, and that he was a   Nooksack. Besides, the 306 like to point out, Kelly’s own family was adopted by the Nooksacks it is originally from a different Canadian tribe. Kelly suggested that the 306 disenroll themselves and reapply under Section H. But he soon called for a referendum to remove Section H from the Nooksack constitution. He said later that this change was unrelated to the 306 and was instead a   tightening of loose enrollment laws that could have let “almost anybody” in. The amendment passed with 61 percent support. As part of their defense, the 306 produced letters from anthropologists. One cited not just the requirements for Nooksack membership provided in tribal code but “historical documents, family oral history and   concepts of identity, affiliation and membership within anthropology regarding the social organization of the Coast Salish peoples. ” But for some tribal members, this only served to undermine his case. “It’s not a club,” a woman named Mary Brewer, who recently gave up her membership in the Lummi tribe to enroll as a Nooksack, told me. “My mom has about 10 different tribes in her ancestry, and she meets the requirements for only two. ” Their family lost title to 80 acres on the Yakima reservation because they didn’t have high enough blood quantum to be enrolled there they were sorry to lose the land, she said, but respected the rules by which modern tribes operate. Brewer’s mother, Diane, said she had two grandchildren whose blood quantum is  . “We’ve been telling them, better marry Native or else it’ll die out,” she said. “The 306 say, ‘Disenrollment isn’t traditional,’’u2009” Mary said. “Well, enrollment was never traditional!” It is, however, the way things work now. “It’s not, ‘this guy took care of me, and that’s how we did it in the olden days,’’u2009” Brewer continued. “If you don’t have documentation, then you’re not Indian. ” In more than 30 years of membership, Annie’s descendants became interwoven in the life of the tribe. They married other Nooksacks and had kids those kids had kids. But once the disenrollment process began, people chose sides. “It was just like a light switch,” Elizabeth Oshiro, one of the 306, told me. People she knew for years “all of a sudden had a different heart. ” With the hearings repeatedly delayed as lawsuits made their way through the tribal court system, both sides formed Facebook groups to argue their cases and regularly debated or taunted each other online. (Their competing slogans were “We Belong” and “We Are Nooksack. ”) “While some people challenge the idea of tribal enrollment, referring to it as ‘Western thinking’ and an imposed system on American Indians,” posted Katrice Romero, the tribe’s housing director, “that tribal enrollment number is what holds the United States government accountable to the American Indian people and its trust responsibility to tribes a responsibility that my ancestors fought, struggled and sacrificed for. ” On the reservation, Michelle Roberts found that people who babysat for her as a child or attended her wedding would no longer make eye contact with her. “The most important thing isn’t friendship,” says Diane Brewer, who no longer speaks to her former best friend, one of the 306. “The most important thing is the tribe. ” In the summer of 2013, Roberts was fired from her job as the   manager at the Nooksack River Casino. Later, when she tried to count the number of disenrollees and their allies who lost tribal jobs, she got to 58. At first, Kelly told me he wouldn’t comment on personnel decisions but later said, “We got rid of all them a long time ago. ” Rudy St. Germain was fired from his job as the casino’s landscaping manager and had to move his two boys into a relative’s house when he couldn’t make rent. “Those were dark days,” he told me. Today he works in a   plant. Roberts and St. Germain couldn’t find resolution in the council. Kelly began insisting that meetings be held over the phone. He’d received threats, he said, and it wasn’t safe to meet in person. When St. Germain and Roberts spoke, no one seemed to be able to hear them. I asked Kelly whether he muted them. He shrugged and said: “Probably. I muted a lot of people. ” (He says they weren’t supposed to be on the call in the first place.) The following winter, Kelly scheduled the first   council meetings in months on the Friday, Saturday and Monday of Martin Luther King Jr. Day weekend the Nooksack constitution allows for council members to be removed from office if they miss three monthly council meetings in a row. St. Germain and Roberts, who were out of town, tried to reach the council by phone or email. At the third meeting, the council declared their seats empty and appointed two new members to replace them. “It was the only way we could get them off council,” Kelly told me later. Rudy said, “I was lost for words. ” By that time, Kelly was calling the 306 scam artists. “Nobody stepped forward and claimed them!” he told me repeatedly. “You don’t show up and just insert yourself into someone else’s family tree. ” With an election looming and four of eight council seats expiring, the council asked the tribal court judge to keep pending disenrollees from voting. After the judge refused, the council declined to schedule the elections. The incumbents remained in office, but some argued that, without an elected quorum, the tribe had no viable government. Several lawsuits, including one called Kelly v. Kelly, brought by a group that included the chairman’s sons, were filed to force elections, but amid litigation, the council abruptly fired the tribe’s judge. The council also barred Galanda from practicing in the tribe’s courts, saying he’d behaved unethically by citing an opinion he wrote while serving as a judge for another tribe the court began to return all of his filings unopened. An appellate court directed the chief of police to arrest and imprison the court clerk if she continued to reject filings when the chief of police refused, the appellate court held him in contempt, began levying a fine of $1, 000 a day and wondered, in its ruling, if “at Nooksack, the rule of law is dead. ” (The council contends that, because the courts are under the jurisdiction of the council, these fines and rulings are meaningless.) Two of the remaining council members whose seats did not expire and who have resisted disenrollment (one is the mother of Kelly’s sons and is now married to one of the 306) were targeted with petitions calling for their recall. One of the recalls succeeded. The charge was treason. In July, some of the disenrollees and their allies scheduled what they called a general council meeting. To avoid the tribal police, they met on the grounds of an old logging show. Several people showed me text messages they received from tribal employees who said they’d been warned that they would be fired if they attended. Later, thinking Kelly might consider the meeting a kind of coup, I asked him what he thought of it. He shrugged. “It was meaningless,” he said. “It’s not real. It’s  . ” George Adams, who taught Lhechalosem language classes for the tribe until he was fired early last year (he’s such a fervent supporter of the 306 that he likes to call himself “307”) called the meeting to order he spoke in Lhechalosem, though he is considered the only remaining fluent speaker. (He learned the language by studying old recordings a quarter century after the last native speaker died.) Adams charged four witnesses with committing the proceedings to memory in order to later share what happened. “Remember these names,” he told the crowd, “because this is how we survived for thousands of years. ” People rose to speak. “My enrollment number is six, so there you go,” said one man, by way of introduction. Another said, “I’m 71 years old, and I’m kind of ashamed to call myself a Nooksack right now. Years ago, our people never asked, ‘Where you from?’ They welcomed you to their table. ” A woman asked how the decisions of this council could be considered valid when there were so few people, around 200, present. People began to speak of shutting down the tribe altogether, to force the Bureau of Indian Affairs, which had consistently declined to intervene, to call new elections. Adams asked for a vote. The crowd decided that the four expired seats on the tribal council were vacant, that everything the government had done since the canceled elections was invalid and that they should vote in four new officers  —   none of them disenrollees  —   from their own ranks. “This has to do with 10 generations from now,” one of the newly elected officers said. He described the   scenario: for lots of people to be cut off from the tribal community, “to be just a person roaming around, trying to figure it out for themselves. ” The new treasurer, Bernadine Roberts, a short,   woman (“Stand up please,” Adams told her. “Oh! You are standing! ”) who enrolled three years after the tribe was officially recognized, told me that until she moved to the reservation from Seattle, she “was one of those urban Indians that didn’t know much. ” She gave a brief acceptance speech about what it meant to her to reconnect to her family’s past. “My grandmother said we were going home, and I didn’t know what she was talking about,” she said. “But I know now. ” In July, after the meeting at the logging show, some of the Nooksack 306 joined in the intertribal Canoe Journey, an annual event in which hundreds of members from dozens of Northwest tribes spend weeks paddling the coast to and from one another’s lands for meals, dancing and ceremonies. They named their canoes  —     with seating for 15  —   for Annie’s daughters, and shared them with people of the Shxway band. Some Nooksacks told me this was ridiculous: the sharing with the Shxway, the names, participating at all. The Nooksack, they said, are known for racing narrow, fast war canoes, not paddling wide traveling canoes. Near the end of the journey, the canoes crossed Puget Sound and came to shore on a sandy beach in Seattle. George Adams, in the center canoe, stood and addressed two elders from the Muckleshoot tribe, which was hosting that day. “We are all one,” he said, “carrying on the tradition of knowing who you are and where you come from. ” The following month, the 306 celebrated what they saw as a hopeful precedent when the Grand Ronde Tribal Court of Appeals overturned the disenrollment of Chief Tumulth’s descendants, holding that it was unfair to subject tribal members to “such an extreme sanction” after accepting them for nearly three decades. Elsewhere, a few tribes have rejected disenrollment altogether. The Federated Indians of Graton Rancheria in California amended their constitution to ban disenrollment in 2013. The Spokane tribe of Washington did the same in 2015, as part of more than two dozen constitutional changes meant to better reflect the historical complexity of the tribe. But the Nooksack dispute dragged on. In October, the Bureau of Indian Affairs informed Kelly that it would not recognize any actions of the tribal council because it failed to hold elections in March 2016, stressing that it wasn’t telling the tribe who counted as a member but simply responding to the “exceedingly rare situation” of a council’s lacking a quorum. The tribe scheduled new elections and certified the results of a referendum to disenroll the 306. But the bureau would not recognize the results: by excluding pending disenrollees from voting, the tribe had violated its constitution and the rulings of its court of appeals. So when the 306 received letters informing them that their   disenrollment hearings had finally been scheduled to take place on the phone in November, they weren’t sure what to do. Some, including Rudy St. Germain, refused to participate on the grounds that the hearings were illegitimate. Others scheduled their appointments, then called in to tell the council they didn’t recognize its authority. Michelle Roberts called from Canada, where she was staying with Shxway friends. “Annie George was Nooksack because her father was Matsqui George, and he was Nooksack,” she said. “We are all Nooksack. I am Nooksack. I can’t say that more and mean it more. ” A voice came on the line. It was Bob Solomon, who holds one of the expired council seats and is a descendant of Madeline Jobe: “I have never heard anybody say that you were adopted by Madeline Jobe. You are not my relative through Madeline. ” “Yes, we are,” Roberts said, her voice rising. “The document proves it, my grandmother proves it, the oral history proves it. ” “That’s your story,” he said. “That’s not mine. ” A week later, the day before Thanksgiving, Kelly announced that the tribe had removed the names of “  who had been erroneously enrolled in the Tribe” from its membership list. Those who called and those who didn’t, all were gone. “It’s finally over,” he wrote. But of course it wasn’t over. The departments of Housing and Urban Development and Health and Human Services, which enforce the government’s treaty responsibilities to provide housing and health care to the tribe, did not recognize the disenrollment of the 306 and maintained they were still entitled to their services. In late December, the Bureau of Indian Affairs warned that the tribe’s failure to hold valid elections put all its federal funding at risk. There were now two sides offering two competing realities, each telling the other it was illegitimate. The 306 would be another chapter in the long, strange history of who decides who is  —   and who isn’t  —   an Indian.

3 - One afternoon last summer at BEAM 6, an experimental program in downtown Manhattan for youths with a high aptitude for math, a swarm of   and    jockeyed for a better view of a poster labeled “Week One Challenge Problem. ” Is there a   number where the first digit is equal to how many 0’s are in the number, the second digit is equal to how many 1’s are in the number, the third digit is equal to how many 2’s are in the number, all the way up to the last digit, which is equal to how many 9’s are in the number? Within the scrum was a trio of   : “Can we work on this during Open Math Time?” one asked. The second, wearing    glasses and dogged by the fear that he did not belong  —   “I’m really not that good at math,” he had told me earlier  —   lingered at the snack cart. “Leave some for the rest of us, J. J. ,’’ demanded the third, gently elbowing him aside. To Mira Bernstein, a BEAM instructor and a leading figure in the extracurricular math ecosystem that incubates many of the nation’s scientists and engineers, the scene was unremarkable, except for one striking feature: None of the children were wealthy, and few were white or Asian. The 76 students, drawn from New York City public schools with   populations, were embarking on a curriculum that they would have to continue on their own during the school year to be eligible to apply for a second, even more intense math summer program, BEAM 7. That application is due at the end of this month, and with it comes a verdict of sorts on their membership in a   subculture where it can be astonishingly difficult to find others who look like them. “This is probably more   black and Hispanic kids than I’ve seen in my whole career,” said Dr. Bernstein, who received a Ph. D. in algebraic geometry from Harvard in the 1990s. “That’s why I’m here. ” The extreme racial homogeneity in the rarefied realm of young math wizards has drawn little attention in a nation where racial equality in the basic institutions of civic life  —   schools, housing, health care, policing  —   remains elusive. But it has become an increasing source of consternation for some mathematicians, educators and business leaders, who see it directly linked to the striking underrepresentation of blacks and Latinos in     jobs in finance, science and technology. As those occupations increasingly propel our society, they fear that enrichment programs for mathematically gifted children, while rooted in meritocratic ideals, have become a particularly potent means of reinforcing privilege. Even as movie audiences celebrate “Hidden Figures,” the story of black women who overcame legally sanctioned discrimination to perform critical calculations in the race to put a man on the moon, educators say that new, subtler obstacles to   math education have arisen. These have had an outsize influence on racial prejudice, they contend, because math prowess factors so heavily in the popular conception of intelligence  —   a concern that recently provoked the creation of “Mathematically Gifted and Black” and “Latin@s and Hispanics in Mathematical Sciences,” websites featuring math professionals from underrepresented backgrounds. “Fundamentally, this is a question about power in society,” said Daniel Zaharopol, BEAM’s director. “Not just financial power, but who is respected, whose views are listened to, who is assumed to be what kind of person. ” BEAM is short for Bridge to Enter Advanced Mathematics, and this, the program’s first year of BEAM 6, for students who had just completed the sixth grade, is what many within elite math circles see as the most promising effort yet to diversify their ranks. The four weeks, spent in a school near City Hall, would be intense: four hours of math a day taught by 10 experienced math teachers, several of them Ph. D.’s. There would be no prepping for standardized tests or effort to cover school material at a faster pace. Instead, as in the elite summer programs that Mr. Zaharopol had himself attended, BEAM focused on the kind of creative   that mathematicians say lie at the heart of the discipline. And because one summer would not be anywhere near enough to equip the BEAM   with the same kind of math preparation as their more affluent peers, the real goal of the founders  —   a mix of   millionaires and professional mathematicians  —   was to hook them enough to want to keep at it. A graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who suspended his graduate studies in algebraic topology to launch BEAM, Mr. Zaharopol had some idea of what his students were up against. By age 12, many attendees of the highly selective programs on which BEAM was modeled had already won regional math contests and completed online math courses in subjects like number theory. Some had been introduced to advanced math in school honors programs or by math teams. Many were the children of scientists and engineers, or of   parents who turned to math as another way to give their children a competitive edge in the battle for admission to elite colleges. “When I was 6, my dad taught me to use the abacus and do mental math,” one student at a selective program called MathPath wrote on the application form. By contrast, BEAM students come from environments where “math is not in the air,” Dr. Bernstein said. The parents of the boy at the snack cart, Jonathan Jackson, do not have degrees in math or science. His school, Kipp STAR, is a   charter school in Harlem, but does not have a math team. And like many of the other students at BEAM, Jonathan, who is   seemed to have already internalized the racial stereotypes about math that, studies have shown, shape   among young Americans of all backgrounds. “They did a study that shows white kids have more chances,” he said once, remembering a fragment of something he had been told. Then he shrugged, “I don’t know if it’s really true. ” Tracing Jonathan’s path through the program and into the school year provides a glimpse of both how easy it might be to nurture a love of math, and how daunting. It is also a testament to the persuasive power of friendship, unfolding over several months in the context of prime numbers and polyhedron sculptures. Jonathan, who chose J. J. as his summer nickname, had done everything in his power to avoid attending BEAM, which is financed by individual donors and foundations, and is free to participants. Then 11, he was chosen by his school to take the program’s admissions test, and hid the acceptance letter upon receiving it last spring at school. When his mother, Kiana Ashburn, 32, found the letter buried at the bottom of his backpack, she waved off his pleas to go to the karate camp she had signed him up for. “You need to get a good education so you can get a good job and have a good future,” she told him that afternoon in their sparely furnished rowhouse in the Fordham neighborhood of the Bronx. She was all the more certain on the Friday before the program started, when the world awakened to a Facebook Live video of an unarmed black cafeteria worker in Minnesota, Philando Castile, bleeding to death in his car after being shot by a police officer. She often made Jonathan repeat what he was to do if he were ever stopped: “Just do what he says, and like, don’t try to resist,” he recited. She thought of math as a field that “usually Asians dominate,’’ she said. It would not protect him from police violence, she knew, or the other things she feared. Her brother had spent time in prison. “But it could act as a buffer,” she remembers thinking. Ms. Ashburn, a postal clerk who graduated last year with a business degree from Monroe College in the Bronx, left before dawn for work on the first day of camp. Jonathan’s sister, Jasmine, a year older than him, was headed to summer school after dropping off their younger brothers at karate camp. Jonathan walked himself around the corner at 7 a. m. to meet his subway group in what would become a daily routine. Omar Pineda Jr. was the counselor assigned to escort them, but it was Emyr Willis, 11, who broke the ice. “Hello,” he greeted them with the formality they would come to see as his trademark. “I am the both the emissary and ambassador from my school. ” Thays Garcia, also 11, was the group’s third member. “I love math,” she said, her face lighting up when asked why she had agreed to spend her summer doing math problems. Her stepfather, Kevin Rincon, who dropped her off each morning, said he had taught himself algebra while serving a prison sentence for a drug felony. Now an account manager at   Mr. Rincon had several years earlier set Thays up with Khan Academy, a widely used service with free online math lessons. As she breezed ahead several grade levels, her friends gave her a nickname that she proudly took on: “Calculator. ” But Khan, Mr. Rincon also knew, was designed to foster basic math literacy, not “the theoretic understanding of exactly what is going on,” as he put it in his email to BEAM. “I want new possibilities and worlds opened for her to see. ” Jonathan did not know it, but he had placed comfortably in the top half of the students admitted to BEAM, who in turn had been drawn from the top quarter of the 400 nominated by schools or parents to take the admissions test. He had spotted patterns and tried solutions that others had not. He had also placed above grade level on New York’s statewide math test, a distinction shared by only 21 percent of the city’s sixth graders, and just 7 percent of sixth graders who are black. He and Thays and Emyr were exactly the kinds of promising students for which BEAM had been created. But it had not been easy to get it going. Some potential supporters objected to devoting resources to   minority students rather than the much larger group performing below grade level. Others voiced perceptions that reflect common stereotypes  —   including the idea that Asians are naturally better at math than anyone else. Sociologists say that misconception exists in part because a high proportion of Asian immigrants to the United States already possess a   degree. They are, in turn, better equipped to steer children toward advanced math programs, as are   scientists and engineers, who are disproportionately white. In interviews, directors of established elite math programs expressed dismay at the way their own enrollments reflect those patterns. Most are nonprofits with limited money, organized by trained mathematicians for the benefit of students whose passion for math often leaves them at the bottom of social hierarchies at school. Some offer scholarships, but most said it was often difficult to find qualified students from underrepresented groups. “We don’t see many applications from blacks and Latinos,” said Glenn Stevens, the director of Program in Mathematics for Young Scientists, a summer math camp for high school students based at Boston University. “I wish I could tell you it was improving,” said Elaine Hansen, the director of the Center for Talented Youth at Johns Hopkins University. “I don’t see that it is. ”   about 15 percent of the   population under 45, obtained about  2 percent of the Ph. D.’s in the fields of math, engineering and physical sciences awarded in 2015, compared to 18. 7 percent in social work and 7. 3 percent of doctoral degrees in all fields, according to the National Science Foundation. (A total of 20 black graduate students received Ph. D’s in math and statistics, out of 1, 802). Hispanics were only marginally better represented. That means whites and   are the   recipients of the tens of billions of dollars in public funding devoted to research in those fields. It also affects   employment: Both Google and Facebook reported last year that Hispanic and black employees together account for only 4 percent of their technical work force. There are other reasons for career disparities beyond who goes to math camp, of course, like the expense of postsecondary education and an effectively segregated public school system that provides   education to many minority students. But the math divide is growing as more white and Asian parents enroll their children, even when they don’t show a knack for numbers, in online math classes and the weekly math circles that have sprouted on university campuses. And the lack of   experiences for black and Latino students, mathematicians and educators say, makes it harder for even high achievers in good schools to compete for spots at the colleges that serve as a springboard for plum jobs in science and technology. “How do you even know a whole bunch of students are supersizing their education and you’re just doing your homework and getting A’s in your A. P. calculus classes?” said Quinton McArthur, M. I. T. ’s associate dean of admissions. “It’s exacerbated the gap and no one even realizes. ” BEAM was founded in 2011 with help from Sandor Lehoczky, a senior trader at Jane Street and a onetime math team champion, who is known for subjecting job applicants to math puzzles. The math whizzes he hires, he said, have been “swimming in a culture of math’’ from an early age. But BEAM’s selective camp for students from   backgrounds who had just completed seventh grade has had mixed results. “Although our students make tremendous progress,” Mr. Zaharopol wrote in a 2015 grant proposal, “it is clear that many of them, even our highest achievers, are still well below their potential. ” BEAM 6, designed for students who have just completed sixth grade, he said, reflected what they had learned: “We need to start earlier and we need to keep them for longer,’’ he said. At BEAM, Jonathan turned the lights off when he walked in and out of classrooms. He sped from one end of the room to another on his rolling chair, popping in on fellow students who were supposed to be working. He seemed more focused on complaining about the lunch food than zeroing in on logic. “Mathematicians love the struggle,” one of the teachers repeated as a kind of mantra when students complained. “When you feel uncomfortable, you’re learning. ” But whether students like Jonathan were having trouble with the math, were unprepared or were simply not trying was a subject of debate. In their weekly faculty meetings, the teachers often marveled at their students’ progress. “I can’t get them to stop doing math,” said Giselle George, who teaches at a public middle school on the Lower East Side. But teaching advanced concepts to students who had not all had the chance to learn certain basic math skills, like the laws of exponents, proved more difficult than some had anticipated. “I find they’re not very good at   when they’re lost or bored,” said another teacher, Marcelle Good. “I guess they’re used to being lost or bored. ” During the program’s second week, Jonathan was a focus for both their hopes and their frustrations. “How do you get kids who haven’t had the exposure the tools to even realize that math is something they like?” Dr. Bernstein lamented. “He’s engageable,” said Michael Pershan, who teaches   math at St. Ann’s, a private school in Brooklyn Heights. “I vote for upping the mathiness. ” “I’m open to suggestions for how to reach him,” said another. “He’s a pretty big distraction in my class. ” Beyond their views, though, there were signs that Jonathan was finding other ways to connect to math. A few days after the challenge problem was posted in the hallway, he was lingering by the snack cart again when Thays arrived. “Hey, Thays,” he said, brightening slightly at the sight of his commuting partner. He had infuriated her that morning by snapping a   picture of her nostrils with his phone, but had quickly redeemed himself by directing her to the sole empty seat on the crowded train. “You going to try it?” she asked, nodding toward the problem. They both knew she had already solved it. (See how she did it in this quiz it’s question No. 5.) He shrugged, looking sideways at her. “Maybe,” he said. By the second week of camp, Jonathan, Emyr and Thays knew the passcodes to one another’s phones so they could trade games. Thays and Jonathan had a running Subway Surfers phone game competition Emyr sought to inspire the others with his passion for Pokemon Go. But they didn’t share everything. Thays did not divulge, for instance, that her biological father, whom she rarely saw, had canceled plans for a trip she was looking forward to later in the summer. His friends did not know that Jonathan’s father was a subway train conductor whom he had last seen about a year ago, in a chance encounter at the 125th street subway station near his school. Emyr did not talk about the bullies who had tormented him in elementary school. But one day on the subway that week, they talked about Black Lives Matter, a subject that held an emotional resonance, at least for Thays and Jonathan. When it came up, it seemed at first that Emyr had not been able to hear the thread of Thays and Jonathan’s conversation over the subway din. Thays, whose parents and stepfather are Dominican, had been to a protest some months earlier with her stepfather. She had written a poem about it. Jonathan had a vivid memory of the video his mother had shown him earlier that month: “There was a kid in the back of the car,” he said, referring to the death of Philando Castile. Trying to translate, I asked Emyr if he had heard of Black Lives Matter. Emyr’s father is Jamaican, his mother Puerto Rican. “No,” Emyr said. “But it’s true. ” Jonathan, looking up from his phone, took the opportunity to fill him in. “How can you not know what Black Lives Matter is?” he demanded. “It’s about how black people are getting killed by cops and it needs to stop. ” Seeking to lighten the trip home that afternoon, Mr. Pineda asked what they recalled of their day. Thays volunteered the simple riddle Dr. Bernstein had asked in her “Codes Codes Codes” class: “I’m thinking of a number from zero to 15. You have to guess my number by asking me four yes or no questions. ” Then Thays added the problem’s final complication: “How many questions does it take if I’m allowed to lie once?” As they deduced the strategy, they were working up to a harder problem, related to Hamming codes, the   codes that underlie digital storage and communications. “There’s also something called binary,” Thays informed Jonathan and Emyr. The girls she had become friends with in that class had agreed that they were all going to BEAM 7, she volunteered. “What about you guys?” “Of course I’m going to BEAM 7,” Emyr said. “J. J. ?” she prodded. But he was peering into his phone. That Jonathan was one of just a few   boys at BEAM (some of the other black students were the children of African or Caribbean immigrants) could have been a fluke. Or it could have been a reflection of the unique forms of discrimination faced by young   males, even in elementary school. BEAM relies on the schools with whom it partners to select which students to take its admissions test, and teachers, studies have shown, pass over qualified black students for gifted programs at higher rates than for whites and Hispanics. Black boys, said Danny Martin, an education professor at the University of Illinois at Chicago, are most subject to the classroom dynamic he calls “Learning Mathematics While Black. ’’ Along with incarceration rates that are higher for young black men than for any other group, that dynamic may contribute to why black women receive a higher share of bachelor’s degrees in math, chemistry and physics, fields in which men of other ethnicities outnumber women. Whatever the reason, many of the   counselors working alongside the teachers at BEAM were paying special attention to Jonathan. One of them was Christian Henderson, an   accounting major at Siena College, in Loudonville, N. Y. “It’s important to educate a kid like J. J. right now,” he said, “so they know in their head they’re on the same level as any white or Asian or Hispanic kid, before they get a little older and they see other people may not think, you know, that’s true. ” Jonathan’s subway counselor, Mr. Pineda, 22, who is part Honduran and part Dominican, told Jonathan how a professor at Amherst College had mentioned that summer math camp had paved the way for many of his wealthy white classmates, whereas he felt lost during his sophomore year in discrete mathematics. A   student at a Harlem high school where the majority of his fellow students were deemed unprepared for college, Mr. Pineda had taken A. P. calculus and secured admission to Amherst with the help of an organization called QuestBridge aimed at matching underrepresented minority students with   colleges. By most measures, he knew, he was a success story. He had just graduated with a degree in math and Japanese studies. But it still bothered him that his classmates, the “summer math nerds,” as he and a friend had taken to calling them, had zoomed ahead. “You should look at this, J. J. ,” Mr. Pineda said on the Thursday afternoon of BEAM’s second week, leafing through his homework folder to a triangular numbers problem. “I think you’d like it. ” The following morning, Thays collapsed in pain at the Columbus Circle subway station as they were waiting for the A train. Emyr paced. Jonathan patted her arm. Mr. Pineda debated what to do. Her stomach hurt, she said. He tried to reach her parents, then called 911. Another counselor met the boys to take them to camp while Mr. Pineda accompanied Thays to the emergency room. When she didn’t come back the next day, or the next, Jonathan railed at Thays’s invisible presence as he, Mr. Pineda and Emyr made the morning commute. “Thays! I know you’re just at home watching TV!” He also found himself thinking about math on the subway, visualizing a problem with triangular numbers and sifting through their patterns. BEAM teachers had explained it as a combination of math and pocket change: A triangular number is the number of pennies required if you’re trying to make a triangle. For instance, if you want your triangle to have 2 pennies to a side, you’ll need 3 pennies total if you want it to have 3 pennies to a side, you need 6 pennies for a triangle of 4 pennies to a side, you need 10. So 3, 6, 10 (and so on) are called the triangular numbers, and Jonathan was in search of the 299th triangular number. With the help of Marquia Williams, a BEAM counselor who was majoring in math at the State University of New York at Oswego, he figured it out, rewarding her with a stifled grin. After nearly a week away, Thays returned  —   her collapse had been caused by an ulcer that required minor surgery  —   to find Jonathan actually sitting still. He even raised his hand once in a while to offer insights in the class they shared. At home on one of the final days, Jonathan’s sister, Jasmine, sat on the steps of their house. She had been attending summer school to catch up in several classes. “How’s that camp going?” she asked. “Are you still behind in your math?” He was silent for a moment. “You know, I’m not at that camp because I’m bad at math,” he said finally. “I’m there because I’m good at math. ” On the last day of program, the BEAM students gathered in a room to receive a graduation certificate. As their names were called, the counselors cheered. An especially loud one erupted for Jonathan. Mr. Zaharopol made a final plug for the online   class he hoped they would take, which started a few weeks after the beginning of school. Each student received a sheet of paper with information about how to log on. BEAM would cover the cost. They would also receive problem sets in the mail, he told them, and he hoped they would send them back. The application for BEAM 7 would come at the end of the year. Emyr was among many who sobbed as the assembly broke up. A few parents had taken up the invitation to attend, including Thays’s stepfather, but he was under strict instructions to drive home on his own. “She wants to go home with her regular group,” he said, shrugging. On the subway, Thays fished in her bag, pulling out a white envelope that she gave to Omar then another that she gave to Emyr, marked with a drawing of his favorite Pokemon character. “You made a slight mistake with the Pikachu,” he noted. “Their eyes are supposed to be black on white. ” “Where’s my present?” Jonathan demanded, as she chatted with Omar. “Come on, Thays. ” Thays let a few more stops go by before relenting. Jonathan tore open the envelope. “Oh special, special JJ,” she had written. “You are so annoying and rude. You always would get me mad and never stopped bothering me. But you always made the train ride fun. You were such a good BEAM friend and I hope to see you in BEAM 7. ” Jonathan paused for a moment before looking up. “Now if you gave me a Nerf gun, it would be better for everyone,” he said, and put his arm around her. The three exchanged phone numbers. A few weeks later, poring over the surveys the students filled out on the last day, Mr. Zaharopol and his staff could take some measure of satisfaction. “I want to get a Ph. D. in math,” one student had written. Neither of his parents had graduated from college. Jonathan, in his review, recommended to future students that they pack their own lunches. He also wrote: “I learned math they don’t teach me at school. ” The teachers, though, wondered how much they’d really been able to achieve. “They’re extremely passionate, and quick to pick up things,” Mr. Zaharopol said in late October, when the BEAM staff gathered for an assessment. “But how many will stick with it? And are we reaching them soon enough?” As police shootings of black men continued and Donald J. Trump moved into the White House, Jonathan’s mother had started to question her belief in the power of math to provide her son with a buffer. “It’s just shocking that his views are the views of a lot of Americans,” she said of the new president. She had allowed Jonathan to take karate after school, and by the start of winter he had obtained his advanced white belt. Jonathan had not heard from Thays, and he was flagging in the online   class for which he had dutifully signed up. Sometimes his internet service, always erratic, would disconnect during the lessons. “I might not be able to do it for a few weeks,” he told me. “I have homework. ” But Emyr noted that all three of their names were on the short list of students who had sent back at least two correct answers to one of the problem sets that BEAM sent home. And one evening, on the top bunk of the bed he shares with his brothers, Jonathan decided to try Thays again. “Hey,” he typed into his phone. “Who is this?” came the reply. “Jonathan from BEAM,” he replied. “J. J. ??!!” Her phone had been broken, she explained. She hadn’t received his texts. They traded messages, until Jonathan’s mother reminded him that his phone privileges had been suspended. “I am grounded for a week, so this is the last time we will be talking for now,” he typed quickly. When the BEAM 7 applications arrived earlier this month, Thays and Emyr set to work. No math problems this time, just questions, 11 of them. What did she want to achieve in the eighth grade? “I want to get into Bronx Science!” Thays wrote, a reference to one of the city’s most selective public high schools. “I mean who doesn’t?” Why did he want to go to BEAM 7? “To see my BEAM peers,” wrote Emyr, in addition to “challenging my brain. ” Jonathan let his application sit on the kitchen table for a week. He let a long snow day with no school pass without looking at it. If he didn’t want to go, his mother had told him, she wouldn’t force him. He could do karate instead. Last Sunday, he began filling in the blanks. What kind of math did he find interesting? However unwittingly, his answer reflected BEAM’s key lesson: “I find proportion problems interesting because I’ll always be confused,” he wrote, “but I figure out the answer anyways. ” On Monday, at work, his mother put it in the mail.

3 - When Indira Islas was in third grade at Centennial Arts Academy, a public elementary school in Gainesville, Ga. she decided it was time to get serious. It was 2006, and she was in the lowest reading group in her class. She had been in that group since arriving two years earlier, speaking no English, in Gainesville, a city of 38, 000 just northeast of Atlanta’s booming outer suburbs. But being at the bottom went against everything she believed about herself. “I wanted to be with the smart kids,” she recalls. Starting the year before, in second grade, she read every volume of the “Magic Tree House” books in her   library, a series about two ordinary siblings who climb into their backyard treehouse and   to Pompeii, the Wild West, the ice age, feudal Japan and beyond. “I absolutely loved them,” she says. “It was like going on adventures all over the world. ” It was also the opposite of her own life. Indira left Mexico for the United States at age 6 with her parents and two younger sisters. Her mother cleaned houses when she wasn’t caring for the children  —   there would eventually be seven of them  —   and her father worked in construction, and there was no money for   lessons or soccer clubs, let alone traveling. “I’d hear about trips and experiences of my white friends, and I remember thinking: I’ll never go to the beach or Disney World for spring break,” Indira says. Her parents told her that education was all that mattered, and she had to spend all her free time inside, reading and writing. “I tell my children this country is a blessing to all the people living here,” her mother told me. “If you have the opportunity to be good, it’s very important to take it. ” Indira took this advice to heart. By the time she was in fifth grade, her reading skills had improved so much that she tested into the top reading group. By middle school, she consistently got A’s, which qualified her for a celebratory school trip every time report cards came out. “They rewarded us by taking us skating or bowling,” she says. “I felt like I was so smart, just getting the chance to go out for the whole school day with friends. That’s when I said: ‘I can make it. ’’u2009” Indira began to throw herself into everything. At recess, she played soccer and basketball, competing so fiercely that everyone took notice. Boys usually picked other boys for their teams, and white kids tended to favor other white kids. But everyone started picking Indira. In middle school, she was on the track team, running   races. Her coach was stunned by her determination. In meets, even when she won her event, she scolded herself unless she broke her previous record. After practices ended, she would keep running. “I wanted to think,” she says. “I’d stay after practice and run and run and run. ” Indira remembers understanding vaguely that it wasn’t just poverty that set her and her family apart. Her parents had been doctors in Mexico. She admired pictures in their dresser drawer of the two of them in their 20s standing together, tall and proud in their white coats  —   before they all fled the violence of drug gangs who were then taking over their home state, Guerrero. When she asked her parents why they were no longer doctors, they explained it was because they were not American citizens. It didn’t make sense to Indira. Why would her father have shed that beautiful crisp white coat for the fraying pants and shirts he now wore? Soon after Indira turned 13, in 2011, she was riding home from track practice with her mother when another car sideswiped the family’s Ford Expedition. The other driver, who was at fault, insisted on calling the police, according to Indira and a lawyer who assisted the family. Indira pleaded not to involve the police, explaining that her mother did not have a driver’s license because she was not an American citizen. (In Georgia and most other states, undocumented immigrants cannot obtain driver’s licenses.) But the driver said she needed a police report to get insurance to cover the damage to her car. A police officer arrived and asked for Indira’s mother’s license. When she said she did not have one  —   a state crime  —   she was told to get out of the car. Indira got out, too. She remembers two of her younger siblings sleeping in the back, one in a booster seat, one in a car seat. Two elders from the church they attended arrived to ask for mercy. She has seven children, they told the officer. He responded that he was simply enforcing the law. Indira’s mother turned to her and began to cry. “Indira, I don’t know what is going to happen,” she said. “They’re going to take me. ” Indira remembers remaining strangely calm. “When she was being handcuffed, I said: ‘Mom, everything is going to be O. K.’’u2009” Indira’s mother was held in Gainesville’s Hall County jail for three days, but that wasn’t the most frightening part for the family. Hall is one of four counties in Georgia that have a formal agreement to report arrests of undocumented immigrants to the Department of Homeland Security, which means that infractions as minor as a   bulb above a license plate can spiral into deportation proceedings. Indira’s mother says that her charge of driving without a license ultimately led to a referral to immigration court and a deportation order instructing her to leave the country within 30 days. She stayed, slipping into the shadows. Every day since, Indira says, she and her siblings have feared that their mother would be deported. It would take only one more traffic stop. “That woke me up,” Indira says. “Until then, I thought the world was happy. ” In fact, she now realized, it was only American citizens who seemed truly happy. “It must feel pretty good, I guess, to not have to worry about whether your family could be taken away any day. ” Indira has wanted to be a doctor for almost as long as she can remember. When she was 10, her family was shopping for groceries at Sam’s Club, and she spotted a large book about human anatomy. She became so excited about it that her parents bought it for her birthday, even though it was well above her reading level  —   and their price range. She began working her way through it, mesmerized, and when she got stuck, her mother would explain whatever had stumped her. She was determined to go to college and medical school and fulfill her parents’ interrupted dream. In her junior year, Indira began researching college options. She would be a strong applicant. She was consistently at or near the top of her class she was on the   track and soccer teams she volunteered over 1, 000 hours a year at the local hospital, a record in the history of the   program and she led her school’s chapter of the Hispanic Organization Promoting Education (HOPE) which encouraged Latino students  —   who made up just over half the district’s population  —   to stay in school and graduate. She was distressed to discover that Georgia barred undocumented immigrants from attending its top public universities and charged them    tuition at all others  —   triple the rate for citizen residents. She then turned to researching financial aid and learned that Congress barred her from accessing federal Pell grants, loans, scholarships and   jobs  —   the most common forms of assistance for   students. At first, she greeted this as just another set of obstacles to surmount, but as time went on, she began to despair. She would retreat to the classroom of her science teacher, Teresa Leach, who had become her mentor, in need of encouragement. “There were a couple of times when I just cried to her because I was tired,” she said. “I questioned myself if it was all worth the effort. ” All the while, Indira told me, she held onto her religious conviction that God had a plan, and that she must respect it. At a college fair attended by representatives of numerous Georgia colleges, she asked admissions officers what kind of help was available for undocumented students. No one had any to offer her. She switched her focus to private colleges and was admitted to Atlanta’s Agnes Scott, which she says awarded her $20, 000 annually in financial aid, less than half of what she needed. She researched   private scholarships and found two for undocumented students, but she was selected for neither. She was awarded seven small scholarships, which totaled $10, 000, enough to go to a nearby public commuter college for only one semester at the    tuition rate. Last May, Indira attended her graduation ceremony at Gainesville High School, but she had nowhere to go next. In every picture from that day, she wears a wide smile, but she was in pain inside, particularly when she caught a glimpse of her mother in the crowd, looking distraught. Unable to bring herself to celebrate with friends, she went home to be with her family. Days later, a friend told her about a philanthropic organization called TheDream. US, which was offering undocumented students full   scholarships to Delaware State University or Eastern Connecticut State University. The application was demanding, and only 76 students would be chosen. She poured herself into the essays, spending hours composing them alongside an English teacher, Cindy Lloyd. She applied to Delaware State, a historically black college in Dover, five hours closer to home than Eastern Connecticut. In late June, she received an email from TheDream. US. “I saw ‘Congratulations,’’u2009” she remembers, “and I read no more. ” In late August, Indira made the   drive with her parents from Gainesville to Delaware State in unusual silence. She was thinking hard about each of her six younger siblings, wondering how they would fare without her. Over breakfast at a Cracker Barrel in South Carolina, when her mother pressed her about how she was feeling, she talked only of her concerns about not being at home to help everyone. When she arrived on campus  —   a flat expanse of grassy courtyards and buildings amid strip malls, auto dealers and chain restaurants just beyond Dover’s historic capital area  —   she found 33 other “opportunity scholars,” just as worried and hopeful as she was. All of them were assigned to a dorm about a quarter of a mile from the D. S. U. campus, a former Sheraton hotel acquired a few years earlier by the university as part of an expansion. They bonded instantly, traveling as a posse from classes to the library to the cafeteria, often ending up together late at night in the dorm lobby or in a lounge that had been a large hotel suite on the second floor. In their first month on campus, the opportunity scholars were invited to a welcoming ceremony in the school’s Martin Luther King Jr. Student Center with Gov. Jack Markell the Democratic senator Tom Carper Donald Graham, a founder of TheDream. US and D. S. U. ’s president, Harry Williams. “This is not just an opportunity for you it is an opportunity for the state of Delaware,” Markell told them. “It is sad to see your own home state reject such talent and potential. ” He pronounced himself “thrilled that you’re here. ” It was the first time many of the students could recall being welcomed anywhere. “We felt rejection our whole lives from our own states,” Indira said. “We were here only three weeks, and we already met the governor and the senator. It felt like saying ‘Haha!’ to Georgia. ” Of the 34 opportunity scholars enrolled at D. S. U. 28 are from Mexico and one each is from Ecuador, El Salvador, Peru, Gabon, Gambia and Trinidad and Tobago. Their families are a composite portrait of the economic forces that have drawn undocumented immigrants to the nation’s small towns and metropolitan heartland. Their parents work in poultry plants, on factory lines, in warehouses, on construction sites, in restaurants they clean and paint houses and schools, tend gardens. “They make everything look perfect for the tourists,” Yulma Lopez, who left Mexico at age 3, said of her parents’ work for a landscaping company in Charleston, S. C. Almost all their parents work illegally, but many pay income taxes, having obtained federal   numbers. And some, including Indira’s father, have secured temporary federal permission to work and drive lawfully. While most of the students are 18 or 19, typical for college freshmen, some have worked for years in hopes of one day saving enough for college. Olivia Bekale, who is 27 and grew up in Baton Rouge, arrived in Louisiana from Gabon as a child. She graduated from high school in 2008 with a 3. 9 G. P. A. from the Louisiana School for Math, Science and the Arts, a prestigious   boarding school for top achievers. Unable to afford college, she cycled from one   position to the next  —   server at the Melting Pot, a fondue restaurant retail sales consultant for Sprint   agent for Marriott pharmacy tech for Walgreens. Olivia, who had wanted to be a doctor since an aunt died of AIDS when she was 5, had been out of high school for eight years when she learned of the opportunity scholarship she applied immediately. All but one of the students were enrolled in the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, also known as DACA. Created in 2012 by an   executive action, DACA allowed teenagers and young adults who came to the United States illegally as children with their parents to register with the government and in turn receive a   renewable protection against deportation, along with work permits and Social Security numbers. Most of the students, like Indira, signed up at age 15, as soon as they were eligible. With DACA, Indira, who is now 18, was able to get a driver’s license and a job at a Publix supermarket when she was in high school, working 20 hours a week as a cashier and bagger. Being able to work and drive legally, free of the fears her mother faced, and fitting in with her classmates, Indira says, was “living the American dream. ” With her income from Publix, she even was able to get braces for her teeth. The starting point for all of their dreams was education, and the quest for it has been central to the experience of undocumented young people since long before Indira and her classmates were born. In the late 1970s, when undocumented immigrants had yet to move in large numbers beyond border states, Texas passed a law authorizing local school districts to ban them from public schools or charge them tuition. In a landmark decision in Plyler v. Doe in 1982, a narrowly divided Supreme Court struck down the law, finding that undocumented children had a constitutional right to free    public education. The opinion blamed a dysfunctional immigration system for creating the crisis by failing to keep out undocumented immigrants or provide them a path to citizenship. “Already disadvantaged as a result of poverty, lack of   ability and undeniable racial prejudices, these children, without an education, will become permanently locked into the lowest socioeconomic class,” Justice William Brennan wrote for the majority, quoting the   opinion. The case also introduced the argument that undocumented children were legally blameless, unlike their parents: “The classification at issue deprives a group of children of the opportunity for education afforded all other children simply because they have been assigned a legal status due to a violation of law by their parents,” Justice Lewis Powell wrote in a concurring opinion. Undocumented children poured into the nation’s schools over the next generation, and as they reached college age, they coalesced into a movement, advocating access to higher education as well as full citizenship. In 2001, they began calling themselves Dreamers, now an estimated 2. 1 million young immigrants who have grown up as Americans in almost every way except for their passports. The name came from the Dream Act (Development, Relief and Education for Alien Minors) introduced in Congress in 2001 by Senator Richard Durbin, a Democrat from Illinois, and Senator Orrin Hatch, a Republican from Utah, and for which activists fought for over a decade. The measure, which would have put undocumented children on a path to citizenship, never passed, but the vast network of Dreamers became a compelling political force. In 2001, hundreds of them turned out to testify in Texas in favor of legislation to allow undocumented residents to pay   college tuition if they graduated from Texas high schools and lived in the state for three years. “Something magical happened when those kids told their stories,” says the former Texas state representative Rick Noriega, a Democrat who sponsored the bill. “It was a humanizing of a very real issue dealing with children’s dreams and hopes. Every heart on that committee was touched, Republicans and Democrats. ” The legislation passed both houses almost unanimously and was signed by Rick Perry, then governor of Texas and now President Donald Trump’s pick for energy secretary. Texas became the first state, followed quickly by California, to allow Dreamers to pay   tuition. Today, 21 states charge Dreamers the same tuition as legal residents, including six carried by Trump  —   Florida, Kansas, Nebraska, Oklahoma, Utah and Texas. In many of those states, however, the   issue has turned politically treacherous. In Texas, efforts to repeal the tuition law come closer to passing every year, and Noriega says there is no chance the original measure would pass today. The leading national opponents of   tuition for Dreamers include the Republican senator Jeff Sessions, Trump’s choice for attorney general, and the secretary of state of Kansas, Kris Kobach, a Republican who was a leader of Trump’s transition team on immigration. Each argues that students who are in the United States illegally should not get a public benefit in any state that is denied to a citizen from another state. In other words, if Dreamers pay   tuition in Texas, citizen students next door in Arkansas and Oklahoma  —   or Massachusetts, for that matter  —   should have the same right. “How much sense does that make, to have people here illegally, and they have more benefits than those who are here legally?” Sessions asked in a Senate floor statement. Kobach used the same argument to bring   lawsuits against   tuition for Dreamers in Kansas and California. Judges found no legal basis for the claims and dismissed the cases. The larger debate over how to treat an estimated 11 million immigrants who came here illegally has been at a stalemate for decades, with advocates seeking a “path to citizenship” for   families who have been in the country for years and opponents denouncing “amnesty” for people who broke the law to enter the country. Amid hardening resistance in Congress to immigration reform, Dreamers brought pressure on Obama  —   including   and hunger strikes at his 2012 campaign offices  —   to use his executive power to create DACA. The program, announced on June 15, 2012, the 30th anniversary of the Supreme Court’s Plyler decision, proved transformative for Dreamers. They have entered college, taken    jobs, received driver’s licenses, bought cars. They now fly on planes, passing effortlessly through airport security. They still lack legal immigration status, but no longer are they exactly undocumented. “DACAmented,” many have called themselves. Even in states where they pay   tuition, Dreamers still struggle to afford college because they are disproportionately   and have no access to federal financial aid. Fewer than 10 percent of Dreamers who graduate from high school enroll in college. At a time when college graduates earn 70 percent more than those without degrees, these numbers conjure the 1982 warning by the Supreme Court that undocumented children could become a permanent underclass. In response, a handful of philanthropies have adopted the cause of sending students with DACA status to college. The biggest of these, TheDream. US, has raised $90 million to eventually finance 4, 000 students at public colleges, with significant contributions from Donald Graham, former publisher and chief executive of The Washington Post, and his family Mark Zuckerberg and Priscilla Chan Bill and Melinda Gates the   executive William Ackman and Michael Bloomberg, among others. (I was a reporter at The Washington Post from 1980 to 2008.) In 2014, TheDream. US began offering Dreamers full scholarships in states that charge them   tuition. Last year, in partnership with Delaware and Connecticut, the organization created the   program for students from the other 29 states, financed by $41 million in philanthropy from Graham and his family and two anonymous donors. The governors of Delaware and Connecticut agreed to charge roughly   tuition rates for the 34 scholars at Delaware State and the 42 at Eastern Connecticut State  —   a total of $80, 000 per student for tuition, room and board for four years. In an effort to   political opposition, Graham says, the philanthropy works only with schools, like Delaware State and Eastern Connecticut State, that have excess capacity, so that undocumented students are not displacing citizens. And private donors pay all expenses, so that no state dollars are spent. Still, when The Delaware State News ran an article in September about the D. S. U. opportunity scholars, the online comments complained that undocumented immigrants, not citizens, were benefiting. “Trump isn’t perfect, but I will vote for him because he puts Americans FIRST,” wrote a reader named John Huff of Magnolia, Del. “There are plenty of kids who are citizens who have the same dream and should come first. ” And as news of the scholarship spread on the Delaware campus this fall, a number of   students told Dreamers that they resented that their own families had to go into debt for a portion of their education costs while the DACA students got full scholarships. By then, Trump had mobilized   anger in large swaths of the country, having kicked off his campaign criticizing Mexican immigrants  —   “They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists”  —   and vowing to build a wall on the border to keep them out. In stump speeches, he promised to deport all 11 million undocumented immigrants and, in his first 100 days in office, to terminate DACA, labeling it “illegal amnesty. ” Both vows became instant applause lines. Indira declared her major in biological sciences at the beginning of the semester and started a demanding   curriculum with six classes, including biology and chemistry, both requiring labs. Her parents had insisted she not take a job, in order to devote herself to education, freeing up four hours a night that she had spent working in high school. With that extra time, she found the academic challenges manageable. Much harder was living apart from her   family for the first time in her life. Her mother texted her daily. “Good morning, hija,” she wrote one recent morning, using the Spanish word for daughter. “May God bless you today in school. Please be kind to everyone. ” That night, over FaceTime, Indira talked with two of her younger sisters, who like her were born in Mexico and are undocumented. One, a junior in high school, is already on a quest for college scholarships. She and Indira came up with potential essay ideas and discussed her résumé. Then Indira helped the other, a freshman who is the smartest of all the family’s children, Indira says, with physics homework. On weekends, she FaceTimes with her four youngest siblings  —   a sixth grader, a fourth grader, a third grader and a first grader  —   all of whom were born in Georgia and are citizens. Separation from family, from home, even from Mexican food made most of the opportunity scholars profoundly lonely. Estephany Martinez, a petite   major with long black hair, couldn’t stop thinking about her sisters in the first weeks. “Whenever we came home from school, all four sisters would sit in the living room and do our homework and talk and watch TV,” she recalled wistfully of her life in Winder, Ga. In Delaware, “I didn’t have anybody that cared for me. I didn’t have anyone to come home to. ” In early September, she summoned all the scholars to a gathering in the dorm’s   lounge. “All right, you guys, we’re going to be here for each other,” she said. “That part of our lives  —   being undocumented  —   is critical to who we are. We have to share our stories. ” Everyone crowded in, sitting on the sofa, spilling onto the floor, sitting shoulder to shoulder on counters that once were part of a kitchenette, sprawling into one another’s space. Carlos Gonzales of Manteo, N. C. a lanky and cheerful marketing major whose mother is a restaurant cook, broke down crying when he recalled the violence that drove his family from Mexico City. He, his mother and his younger sister moved to North Carolina when he was 7. It was his mother who encouraged him, beginning in elementary school, to reach for college. “I don’t want you to live the life we’re living now,” she told him. In high school, he was an honor student and varsity wrestler and runner, working nights and weekends at McDonald’s in his Outer Banks town. When he received the email telling him he was an opportunity scholar, he said: “I hugged my mom and cried for two hours. The only reason I stopped was I had to go to work. ” Indira told the harrowing story that led to her own family’s departure from Mexico. In 2004, when she was 6, three masked gunmen broke into their home, which housed her parents’ clinic, and robbed them of everything  —   money, jewelry, a new computer, a television, cameras and medications. They filed a report with the police, they said, who didn’t investigate, in deference to cartels then taking over Guerrero, now the most violent state in Mexico. An uncle of her father’s already had been killed. In subsequent years, a cousin of her mother’s, a veterinarian, was kidnapped and never found. Two nephews disappeared. Her mother’s sister has been kidnapped twice  —   most recently this past November  —   and returned only after her family paid steep ransoms. Weeks after the robbery, Indira’s family of five arrived in the United States on a tourist visa that her father procured a month earlier in hopes of taking everyone to Disney World. Instead, they went to Gainesville, where her father’s brother worked in construction  —   one of thousands of Mexican workers who flocked to the north Georgia community in the last 25 years, swelling the Hispanic population to more than 40 percent in 2013 from 8 percent in 1990. Indira said her parents are certain they would have been killed had they stayed. They decided to forfeit their careers for their family’s safety. “I no longer saw my future, but I saw my children’s future,” her father said to me. Antonio Patino, a   major who is a lifeguard and plays bass and guitar in his spare time, told the group about riding with his family in their car in 2015 in Lawrenceville, Ga. when a police officer pulled them over, though none of them understood why. His father, who is undocumented and processes returns for a local manufacturer, was driving but did not have a license. Antonio and his mother, younger sister and brother all watched in terror as his father was handcuffed, placed in a police cruiser and driven off to jail. As it turned out, he was released the next day after paying a fine of more than $800 and was not referred to immigration court for further proceedings, but the incident shook Antonio’s sense of belonging in America. “I felt like I got slapped in the face just for living, trying to be a normal person in this beautiful country,” he said. “It feels like a hole inside me. ” He said he now found himself gripped with fears for his parents’ safety at random moments during his days at D. S. U. It is as if he has swapped roles with his mother and father. “Like I’m now the parent and they’re the child, and I’m worried for them,” he told me. “Not being there, all these   swarm into my mind. What if out of nowhere they get pulled over again?” Calling them and hearing their voices usually comforts him. But after one such call, he said: “I went outside, and I had to cry a little. I was feeling like I couldn’t help them. ” A number of students shared the enormous sacrifices they had seen their parents make for them. Juan Chavez, 23, who grew up in Plymouth, Ind. and worked for five years after high school, told of his mother suffering a breakdown after her divorce from his father. He saw it as a response to the crushing instability of their lives, moving from one home to another in search of shelter. “She’s the strongest person I’ll ever know,” he said. “She’s my role model. My father figure as well as my mother. ” He continued: “I felt so helpless to make things better. I decided almost right then I’ll go to college and medical school if it takes me the rest of my life. ” He is now a psychology and   major, intending to become a psychiatrist. On and on the students went until almost 3 a. m. the common threads in their stories drawing them closer. It was the first time most of them had talked openly about being undocumented, but instead of feeling exposed, they felt safer. Until then, Antonio had gone out of his way to avoid conversations with   at D. S. U. about his scholarship, not wanting to have to explain that he got it because he was undocumented. The next day, though, he fell into conversation with a student who asked him how he happened to come all the way from Georgia to D. S. U. and he said without hesitation: “I got a scholarship. ” “What for?” “I’m undocumented,” Antonio said, surprised at how comfortable this felt. “O. K. man, that’s cool,” the student said. After their long night talking, the scholars also better understood what had propelled them all for as long as they could remember. Throughout high school, the opportunity scholars watched undocumented friends and siblings give up and drop out, shamed and beaten down by public scorn over illegal immigration and the   options awaiting even those who excelled in high school. But they kept on striving, steeled to the insults, positioning themselves for a breakthrough they couldn’t yet see. Now this all made sense. “This pain  —   it pushes us,” Estephany said. “It’s motivation. It has made me who I am. It makes me go through every day. ” “Now we know what drives us,” Indira said. One morning in   at 9:50 a. m. 10 minutes before Indira’s   class was scheduled to start, she and two other opportunity scholars were already ensconced in the three center   seats, notebooks, pens and textbooks at the ready. Indira was wearing a Harvard sweatshirt that a classmate bought for her when their   A. P.  class visited Boston. (Indira couldn’t afford to go.) “I’m going to get there one day,” she said with a confident smile. Most of the other students didn’t arrive until class was about to begin  —   or later  —   and there was little competition for the front rows. A similar scene unfolded that morning in the ultramodern science center, in   class, where Antonio and Jose Reyes Rios, another   major, sat front and center with an   classmate named Hanqaamo Lintisio, who is from Maryland and has a track scholarship. The three had formed a study group and tutored one another so effectively that they all scored above 100 on the midterm. (They nailed the bonus question.) Theirs were the only A’s in the class. The Dreamers gather daily at a long Formica table in a D. S. U. cafeteria for food and conversation. At lunch, Carla Moreno propped her English composition textbook, “Patterns for College Writing,” against a napkin holder, securing it with an apple. She paged through a chapter while eating her salad and chili dog. “It’s just a quiz,” she said, “but I want to keep my A. ” “I deal with a lot of students, and I feel like the Dreamers are at a different level,” says Kevin Noriega, the adviser for their scholarships. “They’re saying, ‘I’ve got to make this happen because it’s my only option. ’’u2009” Of the 488 scholars funded by TheDream. US who began college in 2014, 94 percent remain enrolled after their sophomore year research shows that only 66 percent of   college students nationally return after one year. “This is a   population with retention rates like Harvard’s,” Donald Graham says. Because beneficiaries of TheDream. US have full rides, they avoid a common problem faced by other disadvantaged students: running short of money for costs not covered by Pell grants or other forms of aid. One night in October before a biology exam, Indira went to the D. S. U. athletic center for a workout to relieve stress. She was armed with a stack of homemade flash cards and her iPhone, on which she had downloaded discussions of test topics from various websites. While pounding out three miles on the treadmill, she flipped through her study cards, then plugged in her earbuds for a YouTube lecture on glycolysis. Returning to her dorm, she sat down at her desk for a final review. Hanging on the wall in front of her was a collage of family photographs. One showed the whole family of nine around their dinner table. “When I’m struggling, I look at a picture of my mom or dad, and I say, ‘I’m working for that person,’’u2009” she said. That night, her studying complete, she took a last look at her parents’ picture and fell asleep listening to recordings of her biology professor’s lectures. She got an A on the exam. Indira’s determination to become a doctor requires more than a little imagination, because under current law in Georgia and many other states, licenses to practice medicine are reserved for citizens and legal residents. “I’m not planning my life based on the way things are today,” she said. “I’m thinking of the future. ” In her eyes, America is a land of   opportunity. Over Columbus Day weekend, she visited Washington for the first time with her roommate, Karen Baltazar, who is from Lawrenceville, Ga. and also wants to be a doctor. At the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial, Indira stood underneath Roosevelt’s Four Freedoms  —   freedom of speech, freedom of worship, freedom from want, freedom from fear  —   her arms raised high above her head, as if exulting in the message. Her smile was radiant. Karen snapped a picture, and Indira posted it on her Facebook page along with the caption, “I have never forgotten the reasons my parents brought me to this great country. ” Such unsinkable optimism, which I heard from many D. S. U. Dreamers in the early fall, is hard to maintain, and many of the estimated 65, 000 undocumented immigrants who graduate from high school every year  —   and thousands who drop out  —   simply can’t muster it. In a recent book, “Lives in Limbo,” Roberto G. Gonzales, an assistant professor at Harvard’s graduate school of education, writes that academically successful Dreamers are far outnumbered by those who become casualties of “the deeper and more   consequences of being undocumented: living in poverty, having parents and family members who also bear the burdens of being undocumented, watching friends moving forward but being unable to join them, watching opportunities pass you by, navigating a world of exclusions while constantly looking over your shoulder. ” At least some of the opportunity scholars’ optimism last fall came from their assumption, based on reported polls, that Hillary Clinton would be the next president. They were heartened by her speeches about keeping families together and pursuing comprehensive immigration reform. At the very least, they were confident that DACA would remain in effect under her leadership. Though they didn’t believe Trump could win, he unnerved them with his speeches branding Mexicans criminals who stole Americans’ jobs and lived off their tax dollars. They took this rhetoric as a personal affront and were horrified by the hatred they saw on the faces of those who cheered his words. “The only thing that depresses me is so many people support him,” Jose Reyes Rios, the   major, who aspires to work at Google one day, said in late September. On election night, a group of Dreamers gathered around the   TV in the dorm lobby, many of them studying as they watched returns. Indira had exams the next day in math and biology and arrived equipped with her flash cards. The mood turned dark after Trump won Florida. Everyone’s mind flooded with his vows that they had discounted until now  —   to revoke DACA, to deputize local police departments to enforce federal immigration laws. “We will issue detainers for all illegal immigrants who are arrested for any crime whatsoever, and they will be placed into immediate removal proceedings,” Trump said last summer in Arizona. As all of them knew well, these crimes included one of their parents’ daily activities  —   driving without a license. If DACA disappeared, and with it their Social Security numbers, their own driver’s licenses would be worthless. So would their federal work authorization, meaning most would lose the jobs that paid for their books, phones, clothes, travel home and anything else they needed. By 1 a. m. Indira became too distressed to concentrate. Olivia Bekale was one of four opportunity scholars who watched until Trump was declared the  . “We were just looking at each other and crying,” she says. “We hugged each other and went to our rooms. ” On the Sunday after the election, when they gathered in the dorm lobby, the opportunity scholars were struggling with something unfamiliar: despair. They had registered for DACA with the Department of Homeland Security, which now knew exactly where they were. “Life is going to be like it is for our parents,” said Victor Hernandez of Coats, N. C. stunned and shaking his head. “They could come pick us up and take us away any time. ” Social media brought aftershocks for all of them as they discovered that many of their best friends voted for Trump. Almost all of Antonio’s   swim teammates in Lawrenceville had Trump filters on their Facebook and Snapchat profile pictures. “All I could think was: You voted against me,” he said. “What did I do to you?” The day after the election, Indira couldn’t bear to call her mother until the afternoon. Instead, she confided her fears in text messages to her former science teacher, Teresa Leach. “I’ve never been so disappointed in this country,” she wrote. “I’ve never felt so powerless. . .. I’m scared about my family, my mom. . .. Not sure if I’ll even get my degree, much less go to medical school here. ” When Indira finally did call home, her mother insisted she was not afraid and told Indira that education was now even more important. Several of Indira’s friends back home told her they doubted Trump would follow through on all his campaign promises, and in any case, they couldn’t imagine he would target her. “These are people who helped me get to where I am, who remind me they love me, and I love them,” she said. “But they’ll never understand what we feel. They say, ‘He won’t do that.’ Do they think he’s going to send back all the immigrants except Indira?” A lifeline of sorts arrived the week after the election, when the students received letters from TheDream. US, Governor Markell and the president of D. S. U. pledging to stand behind their scholarships no matter what became of DACA. Donald Graham lined up attorneys to represent them if anyone challenged their right to be in school. But their bigger fears were for their parents. Antonio and Indira went home for Christmas to find their families filled with trepidation. “We’re trying to be invisible, trying to stay hidden,” Antonio’s father said, “do only the things we have to do to live, like go to work, go buy groceries. ” During the 2015 holiday season, they took a driving tour of the Christmas lights and celebrated New Year’s Eve in downtown Lawrenceville. “Now we can’t go to any festivities because for us it’s very dangerous,” his mother told me in their apartment in a complex in Buford, Ga. “There are a lot of police there. ” Antonio’s father said he worries about driving his daughter, Litzy, 15, home from her   practice at rush hour, when the police presence increases. Litzy was born in Georgia, and he thought of asking her to leave the team until she is old enough to drive because, as a citizen, she will be able to get a driver’s license. “But then I said to myself: ‘No! That’s crazy. That’s why we’re here  —   for our kids. So they can take advantage of every opportunity. ’’u2009” He continues to ferry her  —   carefully  —   during rush hour. Indira found her mother more frightened than at any time since receiving her deportation order. Her mother says she has no choice but to drive when someone at her church asks for help, when her children call for rides home and when she is needed at a charity medical clinic where she volunteers as a doctor’s assistant and translator. “Life changed after the election,” she told me in December, in her living room decorated with framed academic awards for each child. She was surrounded by her kids, who listened carefully. “The children know I don’t have a driver’s license. They know at any time maybe the police will take me again. ‘If I can’t come back,’ I tell them, ‘you have to go to school every day. You have to study hard  —   even harder. ’’u2009” By the time Indira and the other opportunity scholars returned to campus in January, all of them had come to the same conclusion: There was now only one thing they could control  —   their education. “The only way we can fight back is to excel in school,” Indira wrote to me in a text message. She felt weary in the aftermath of the election, but when she had this epiphany, she said: “I wasn’t tired anymore. I had that drive, that hunger to just come out on top. I was angry. I was staying at the library longer, going to the gym a lot more. ” Estephany Martinez focused on her life’s mission. “My goal is being a police chief  —   something that makes my voice louder,” said the   major. “I have to educate myself to get there. I want to show people who don’t believe in us: ‘I got all the way here. I’m starting from the bottom with education, and I’m going to get there. ’’u2009” As they settled into the semester, they monitored everything Trump and his close allies were saying about immigration, their moods shifting with each utterance. Back in December, they felt hopeful when Trump, in his interview as Time Magazine’s Person of the Year, said approving things about Dreamers and indicated that he would deport serious criminals before other undocumented immigrants. They were discouraged in January when Jeff Sessions, in his confirmation hearing to become attorney general, appeared unconcerned about the consequences of revoking DACA. They took heart two days later when Paul Ryan, the speaker of the House, said in a CNN   meeting that he wanted Congress to pass legislation making Dreamers “right with the law. ” Indira and other Georgia scholars were exhilarated in early January when a state court ordered the Board of Regents to allow DACA holders to pay   tuition. But their hopes collapsed when a state appeals court stayed the decision Trump appeared likely to revoke DACA before Georgia Dreamers could reap the benefits. “I said: ‘I don’t know what’ll happen next, but we’re here in this place, and the only way we can win is to succeed in our education,’’u2009” Indira told me. Soon after classes started, the opportunity scholars learned that their collective grade point average for the first semester was a 3. 76. Six of the 34 students had achieved a perfect 4. 0. Indira was one of them. “Succeeding for me is how I can get my revenge,” she told me over the phone, interrupting her biology homework for a few minutes. “I want to break the stereotype of us being here taking jobs away and not helping the economy. I want Trump to see we’re the total opposite of what he thinks. ”

3 - Several years ago, I took a journey with my wife and baby daughter to my   ’s childhood home, a forest village in the southwestern Indian state of Kerala. As any Keralite will tell you, Kerala is the lushest, most watery corner of India, a skinny coastal strip where hundreds of tributaries merge into broad, winding rivers before finally flowing into the Arabian Sea. My   ’s village is named Manimala, for the river that provides its reason for being. My wife spent her childhood summers in Manimala, and all her stories seemed to center on the river: the old stone steps that villagers descended to board a ferry or take a bath the neighbors fishing or washing elephants the flotillas of flowers that drifted downstream after monsoon gales. I’d been cultivating a fantasy that our own daughter would spend her summers on these banks. But when we arrived in Manimala, I was shocked: The great river had become a trickle. In a few places it had pooled into puddles big enough for people to wash their clothes. Otherwise it was barren, the stone steps now leading to a   ravine of pale boulders baking in the sun. “What happened to the river?” I asked. “Sand mafia,” my wife’s cousin Thambichan answered. The Manimala, Thambichan explained, once had a sandy riverbed that in some places was 30 feet deep. The sand acted as an aquifer, regulating the river’s flow. But sand is also a crucial ingredient in concrete, and India is urbanizing at a speed and scale virtually unmatched by any country in history. Apartment towers, highways, bridges, skyscrapers, metros, dams: Each of them swallows unimaginable helpings of sand. It could line the rivers, or it could form the cities that were rising everywhere alongside them, but it could not do both at once. “No one listened when we warned of the dangers of sand mining,” my wife’s uncle Shaji told me. With nearly all the sand removed from the river, the water table had dropped for miles around. When the monsoons came, the water whooshed away as quickly as the rain fell. The ordinary wells ran dry, so people drilled tube wells deep into the earth now some of those were running dry, too. The local rice paddies were long gone. Along the river’s route, several major bridges faced collapse, because the loss of sand had weakened their foundations. When Indians use the term “sand mafia,” they’re talking about the whole range of people who profit from illegal sand mining: the local laborers the budding capitalists who own the trucks and earthmovers the genuine mobsters who, in some places, organize the miners and offer extra muscle the suppliers who act as middlemen between the mafias and the real estate developers the police and officials who take bribes from any or all of the above. And the politicians  —   sometimes, it’s rumored, even chief ministers of major states  —   who take their cut and maybe even run   operations of their own. The McKinsey Global Institute calculated that the hundreds of millions of Indians migrating from villages to cities require up to a billion square yards of new real estate development annually. Current construction, according to one estimate, already draws more than 800 million tons of sand every year, mostly from India’s waterways. Though no reliable numbers are available, all the people I spoke to in India assumed that much of it is taken illegally. As I came to know Manimala, it became clear that the river had mostly been mined by the villagers themselves. You could see the evidence in many of the new houses nestled among the rubber trees and coconut palms. Some were made of concrete, large and sprawling and brightly colored: pink, neon yellow,   red. A few had heaps of sand out front to be used for concrete or plastering for new wings and other renovations. One evening, I sat with Saji P. Thomas, a slender, energetic former sand miner with a small mustache, in front of his new house. He told me he started sand mining around 2002, to raise money for a new business. (He now runs a small cosmetics factory.) It was possible then to mine sand legally, but Thomas, like many others, didn’t bother with    permits at first he mined only at night to evade the police. They worked in groups of four or more, he said. Some would pilot the rowboat and the others would dive as deep as 15 feet to fill their baskets with sand. The loads were awkward and heavy. “We’d make a staircase out of tree stumps,” he said. “But the danger was we’d slip off a step and almost choke to death underwater. ” At the river’s edge, another team would load the sand into a truck. Sometimes, Thomas said, the truck driver would get a call that the police were on their way, and they’d scramble to finish loading the truck and flee any bribes the authorities might demand could cut deep into their margins. “There are policemen who have built beautiful houses thanks to sand mining,” he said. His previous job, at a bank, paid 400 rupees a day, roughly $5. A good night’s work mining sand earned him 2, 000 rupees. So Thomas kept at it. “To distract myself, I’d fantasize that I was a businessman in a nice car. ” The work did sound terribly dangerous. But the most striking detail in Thomas’s story was not about the mining itself, but about the attitude of his neighbors who lived at the river’s edge. Back when there was plenty of sand, trucks came day and night to load up at the river. But to get access they usually had to cut across the property of the town’s riverfront homeowners, most of whom would collect a toll of 150 rupees from each truck that passed. Now that sand mining has wiped out the groundwater, those same homeowners have to hire different trucks  —   tankers  —   to bring them drinking water, at more than 1, 200 rupees a trip. The sand was gone, and gone with it were the river, the groundwater and even the tolls. All that was left was a question, one that haunts river communities all over India: Why would any village so willingly accept such paltry gains for certain catastrophe? More than half the apartments built during India’s construction boom can be found in the New Delhi metropolitan area. One of the highest concentrations of these apartments is in Greater Noida, a suburb that lies between the two most sacred rivers in Hindu lore: the Yamuna to the west, and the Ganges to the east. Both rivers are heavily mined, and it’s easy to see where all that sand goes. Greater Noida has come to embody the shiny,   vertical India of the future. Amid seemingly endless colonies of newly constructed concrete apartment towers, you can enjoy one of India’s finest golf courses and the country’s only Formula One racetrack, as well as a shopping mall that tries to simulate the city of Venice, complete with gondola rides. Among all the     clusters, you can still find the remnants of 124 agricultural villages, which 40 years ago were the only habitation in this place: fragmented fields of mustard and wheat, an odd absent acre picked over by a stumbling herd of goats. Greater Noida was created in 1991 and is administered not by a mayor but by a chief executive. The idea was to transform the farmland just outside booming New Delhi into an industrial hub that would attract   factories. (Noida is an acronym for New Okhla Industrial Development Authority.) Instead, according to local accounts, the authority sold much of the farmland to private developers for 10 or 30 or even several hundred times what they’d paid the original landowning farmer, and Greater Noida became a reservoir for population overflow from New Delhi. The few industries that did come to Greater Noida rarely hired villagers, preferring instead to bus in   workers from other northern cities. Young jobless village men and migrant laborers turned to petty theft, and Greater Noida saw a wave of muggings and carjackings. Some   residents began to treat their complexes as fortresses, driving out only in the daylight. Naushad Khan, a    former   farmer with a boyish smile and a boxer’s physique, seized the opportunity presented by the construction boom to enter the entrepreneurial class. As a teenager, he joined and then expanded his elder brother’s digging company, excavating the foundations for new developments and selling the sand they removed. Now, capital in hand, he was starting his own development, an “ ” luxury condo tower, on the outskirts of Greater Noida. He had turned sand into money, and now he would turn that money right back into something concrete. Construction, Khan told me, was an extremely competitive business, which he counted as a blessing. “If you want to succeed, then there should be a good, strong rival against you,” he said when we met at his freshly built office. I asked him if sand mining was ever dangerous. By way of answering, he asked an assistant to fetch his pistol. He set it on the table between us as a kind of conversation piece, next to the tea and cookies. It was     and  . He laughed when I asked if he’d ever had to use it. “Many times,” he said. “Tens of times. Scores of times. ” He was quick to add a clarification: He’d fired it only for safety, shooting in the air to ward off suspicious people or if the atmosphere was wrong. That sort of thing. The last time I saw Khan was at an overwhelmingly well catered wedding reception he hosted for his nephew inside a   tent. Parked inside the entryway was an immaculate white Audi Q5, presumably a wedding gift. Greater Noida had worked out well for him, Khan acknowledged. He always took sand legally, he said  —   he was quite insistent on this point  —   and now he could help provide a comfortable standard of living for an extended family with over 40 members. Amid the festivities, Khan seemed almost giddy with pride for all he had achieved. One afternoon I took a drive around Greater Noida with a local farmer named Vikrant Tongad, a sly young man with pointy shoes and a thick pompadour who wanted to show me what had happened to the surrounding rivers. For long stretches of our trip, the only people we saw on the roadside were hawkers waving glossy brochures, trying to lure us to open houses. Between the high rises, dust storms whipped the empty fields. Every billboard we passed was an advertisement for a   condominium. One featured, alongside the usual list of perks, a flirty photograph of the Bollywood star Deepika Padukone and an unsurpassable slogan: “Nothing Left to Desire. ” Why don’t Indians just shift to other construction materials? In part it’s because concrete is cheap, strong, easy to use and highly versatile. In part it’s cultural: Building a house out of brawny concrete has come to be viewed by many as a matter of prestige. “They feel that beauty is a beast,” the architect B. R. Ajit told me ruefully. The law encourages this tendency. One environmental lawyer explained to me that the Indian building code recognizes a house as a house only if it’s made from specific heavy materials  —   concrete included. “If you use that criterion,” he said, “the president’s house is not a house. ” Now, as we drove past mile after mile of unfinished apartment towers, a city for ghosts, all I could think about was the tons of river sand locked within. Many of the condos in Greater Noida are bought as investments by Indians living abroad, and sometimes buildings are left empty by owners who have no intention of taking residence. In other cases the developers run out of money midconstruction or are halted by legal disputes, leaving bare concrete shells for years on end. Some buyers who actually do intend to move in are left waiting helplessly for the keys to apartments they paid for long ago. Finally we arrived at the floodplains of the Yamuna. We stopped to survey the deep pits and fresh tracks where sand miners with earthmovers had been working under cover of night. Similar pits dotted the land as far as the horizon, some large enough, I later learned, that children used them as cricket grounds. The mining has shifted the course of the Yamuna, destroyed animal habitats, damaged crops and threatened the purity of local groundwater, and it may be causing buildings to sink. But it’s especially difficult to single out the effects of sand mining on the Yamuna because the river is troubled in so many different ways. The truth is that with the exception of a couple of months during monsoon season, by the time the Yamuna River reaches Greater Noida, there is no river at all. Tongad walked me down to the banks, and we saw something that looked like a river: There was liquid in the riverbed, and it flowed in a particular direction. But it’s an illusion. Less than 150 miles north, nearly every drop of the Yamuna is rerouted to provide water for the city. The liquid that flows in the Yamuna riverbed alongside Greater Noida consists of every variety of urban waste: factory refuse, slaughterhouse runoff, sewage. If you walk right up to the water, what you’ll find are swirls of oil, clouds of white chemical foam, animal parts, floating turds. I never spent time next to the Yamuna without getting a headache for the rest of the day. And yet old traditions die hard. I saw the Hindu faithful still dipping their idols into this supposedly sacred sludge. Families still cremate their dead on the ghats along the fetid banks. Our last stop was a shop that appeared to sell cellphone chargers. In fact, the chargers were a ruse it was really an unlicensed wine shop. In the back room Tongad introduced me to a sand miner named Jagbir Nagar. He was a thin man, around 60, dressed head to toe in white, and with him were several young men from the village, all seated around a hookah. Nagar is the sarpanch, or head man, of his village in Greater Noida. He also shares an earthmover with a team of five or six others that they use to mine sand from the floodplains. Together, he said, they can take as many as 100 truckloads of sand a night, some of which is used for local projects and the rest of which is mostly picked up by truckers from the desert state of Rajasthan. (If that sounds like sending coals to Newcastle, it’s not desert sand is too fine and rounded to make strong concrete.) I asked Nagar if he was worried that the mining might adversely affect the quality of the local water. It was a question I had an immediate interest in, given that we were at that moment drinking glasses of what they’d told me was unfiltered local groundwater. Nagar grunted in the negative and looked like at me as if I were an idiot. Tongad answered for him. “They’re happy with mining,” he said. “Groundwater depletes: No problem. River is dying: No problem. ” “People are selfish,” a younger man agreed. “The miners say, We dig a hole, and the next year the river comes and fills it again,” Tongad said. “So what’s the problem?” I had often encountered this attitude in India. Everything is rigged, the argument goes. How can you expect us not to seize whatever meager leavings we can? It’s not as if we’re carjackers  —   we’re taking sand! From what used to be our own land! It’s difficult to convince people who for generations have taken local sand for granted that, like passenger pigeons a century ago, something they had thought of as infinite is now dangerously finite. It’s difficult to tell people who have always been able to take sand according to their needs, and who now have seen outsiders come in and derive great profit from it, that sand is in fact a critical natural resource that needs to be protected. “If the police come, do you fight them?” I asked Nagar. “If there are a lot of police and only a few men, then we run,” he said. “If the police are few and the men are many, then we get into it with them. We fire shot for shot. ” Nagendra Prasad Singh, the district magistrate in charge of enforcing the law in Greater Noida, is a serious man, built like a pillar, with a   mustache and a slight twitch in his right eye. He came from a farming family but earned a graduate degree in physics before entering the Civil Service. His previous posting was in Shamli district, which also lies on the Yamuna, and it was said that he put a complete stop to sand mining there  —   the first I had heard of any such success anywhere in India. When he came to the New Delhi suburbs, Singh quickly began running night raids on illegal miners, seizing dozens of truckloads of sand and imposing fines of tens of millions of rupees on the violators. At his office in Noida’s Sector 27, I asked him if the raids had posed any danger for him. “Have you read the Gita?” he asked. “The soul never dies. The energy may change shape, but the soul never dies. With that kind of confidence, I don’t think anybody can shoot us. ” Singh said he had been fighting the sand mafia since 1999, when he was the city magistrate in Haridwar, a pilgrimage town that marks the spot where the Ganges emerges from the Himalayas. There he learned all about the sand trade from a tiny but stubborn community of activist Hindu monks called Matri Sadan. Their leader, a dreadlocked former chemistry teacher now called Swami Shivanand, moved to Haridwar in 1997 to devote his life to praise of the Ganges, but his prayers were disrupted by the incessant work of the sand mafia. The swami’s objections to mining in the Ganges were largely religious, but as a chemist he was also keenly attuned to the earthly costs. Together Singh and Swami Shivanand set their sights on a businessman named Ponty Chadha, who ruled the sand trade across the state of Uttar Pradesh. He was also the distributor of many Bollywood blockbusters, a real estate magnate, the state’s main liquor baron and a philanthropist focused on   children and had close ties to the chief minister of Uttar Pradesh. Singh and the monks managed to get Chadha’s   license revoked, which left the trade to the motley assortment of smaller players that dominates it to this day. (Chadha died in 2012, when a real estate dispute with his brother Hardeep escalated into a gunfight.) Singh eventually realized that law enforcement alone would not be enough to stop the theft arresting the leaders of many smaller mafias may be an even greater challenge than ousting a big gangster like Chadha. Now his focus is on harm reduction. Central to his argument is an exasperating fact: There really is enough sand in the rivers and offshore to meet India’s demand for concrete and plaster, at least according to many conservationists. In some cases sand mining can even be beneficial. An oversilted river  —   a river with too much sand  —   is also prone to flooding and changing course, and strategic sand mining can help keep it on track. The catastrophes occur only when specific, vulnerable stretches of river are overmined. There’d be no problem if the construction industry mined only from river sites with a carefully identified surplus of sand. Existing laws on sand mining should be adequate to regulate the trade, but as is so often the case in India, the laws are toothless. In 2013, for example, India’s National Green Tribunal  —   a special   court for environmental violations  —   issued a blanket ban on all   mining without environmental clearance. But according to the environmental lawyer Rahul Choudhary, almost all of the applications are granted clearance. Rejections usually occur only because of incomplete paperwork. Singh has a different approach. The first step, he said, is to secure genuine environmental clearances, based on field studies. Next, offer leases to mine on those cleared sites by public auction, with strict parameters on the dimensions of the lease and the depth of excavation permitted. There is no honor system surveyors must map the site and then fix posts into the riverbed to physically block the leaseholders from mining beyond the designated zone. When the mining begins, the magistrate and his officials make frequent unannounced inspections of the sites and weekly video recordings to monitor the depth of sand. The magistrate must also hold regular meetings with townspeople in   areas. “Most important,” Singh said, “is the awareness of the people who are living along the river, so that they may feel like a watchdog, that the river’s interest is their own interest. ” It sounded like a smart plan. But it also seemed to rely almost completely on the presence of extraordinarily vigilant magistrates. If a district was unlucky enough to be assigned a corrupt magistrate, or merely one whose interest in sand mining were less intense than Singh’s, the system would fall apart. It was going to be a difficult model to replicate. I asked Singh if he knew any other magistrates who were taking a similar approach. “I am not in contact with anybody who is doing this,” he said. Criminality and graft have come to be seen as such incontrovertible facts of life in India that, in my experience, people seldom mind discussing them openly. When I met a young real estate agent named Girish Kasana in the office of his father’s construction company, for instance, he brought a particularly   perspective on the realities of how Indian cities are built. “Everything is corrupt,” he said. Construction is the business where criminals have the best opportunities to launder the most money, he explained, and a cascade of bribes go “to the topmost levels in the government. ” Kasana grabbed a copy of a construction tender on his father’s desk and started furiously scribbling numbers on the back. To get a typical government construction commission, he explained, you pay 6 percent in bribes up front. Then, after the first payment, you pay another 7 percent, half of which goes to the state’s top politicians. The development authority’s junior engineer gets 3 percent. The associate engineer gets 1. 5 percent. The senior manager gets 3 percent, and so on  —   until the total reached an astonishing 30 percent. “When this is given, then almost anyone can be managed,” Kasana said. “This is the system. This is India. ” “The thing to do is to get a job in the authority,” my translator joked. “This can also be done,” Kasana said. To get a job as a junior engineer, he said, requires a bribe of 10 million rupees. As I talked to developers about sand mining, I often found myself sympathetic to their explanations. The existing system practically forces anyone who wants to build something to collude in the destruction of the rivers. The sand trade is furthermore sustained by a devilishly inbuilt chain of plausible deniability. Unlike most other categories of mining, where large companies dominate the business, sand mining is executed by an endless array of small, independent, often temporary players, largely working at night and in secret. And each step of the line of production is separated from the rest: The sand moves from diggers to truckers to dealers to builders with each link in the chain knowing as little as possible about where the sand they’re buying comes from or who mines it  —   for obvious reasons, they don’t want to know. Nameable sand dons like Ponty Chadha are rare. The fragmentation and anonymity of the chain is exactly what allows it to continue with so much impunity. “I believe in the power of the people,” Singh told me on my last day in the New Delhi suburbs, just before we got into his pristine white Hindustan Ambassador to go talk to the villagers of Jhatta about sand mining. “To stop an illegal thing, first show your intention. If you are a man of integrity, you have to show it, because people never believe you at first. But gradually, gradually, if you succeed in showing them that you have no personal motive, that you are just trying to motivate them in the larger public interest, that you are just doing your duty, then the people become convinced. That’s my experience. ” In Jhatta, more than 100 villagers, all men, all wearing their best starched whites, gathered in a courtyard next to the village temple to hear Singh’s speech. They had covered their chairs with silky white slipcovers and presented the magistrate with a bursting bouquet of flowers. His oration on sand mining drew on every appeal at his disposal, rhapsodizing about rivers, spelling out the science, quoting scripture. When he finished, his deputy led the villagers in a chant: “Illegal mining: We won’t do it, and we won’t let it happen!” (It’s catchier in Hindi.) It was a compelling speech, and I could see how Singh might convince the villagers of Jhatta, person by person, moment by moment. But of course his adversary is not each villager one by one. It is the systems and values many of us hold in common  —   the competitive lure of conspicuous consumption, the insatiable engine of development, the universal corruption that fuels it  —   all of them obstructing any effort to reckon with environmental catastrophe, which has a confounding tendency to manifest itself long after the original gains have accrued. After the speech, a farmer named Sohan Pal Singh approached me to say that the district magistrate was making too much of sand mining. “For us, it’s a normal activity,” he said. “It’s not such a big deal. ” He wanted to show me something outside: Piled against the wall of the courtyard where the meeting was just held was a heap of sand that he himself had helped mine. I asked him if he planned to stop mining after hearing what the district magistrate had to say. He scowled. “If the district magistrate told me to stop wearing clothes,” he asked, “should I take off my shirt?”

3 - Hours before the start of the Women’s March on Washington on Jan. 21, every Metro car leading to the National Mall was packed so tight that it could take on no more riders. At station after station, the train doors would open, and the passengers would look out on throngs of fellow protesters  —   women, men, children, babies, the occasional dog  —   waiting on the platform. As people emerged from underground into the morning air, it was hard to tell where to go, so they found their way by gauging the human density, moving until they reached a spot so full of people that they could no longer move at all. There was an enormous rally happening somewhere in there  —   activists and celebrities speaking into microphones  —   but much of the crowd couldn’t see or hear anything except rumbling waves of cheers. By the time they were meant to march, the crowd was so large that it already stretched across the entire route, from the rally site near the Capitol to the Ellipse near the White House. The signs they carried spoke to any number of issues: immigration, abortion, race, the environment, inequality, the new president. REFUGEES WELCOME, KEEP YOUR LAWS OUT OF MY VAGINA, BLACK LIVES MATTER, SCIENCE IS REAL, FLINT NEEDS CLEAN WATER, NOBODY LIKES YOU. The handmade pink “pussyhats” that many marchers wore  —   a reference to Donald Trump’s    boasts about grabbing unsuspecting women by the genitals  —   had been sneered at in the days before the march. They were called corny, girlie, a waste of time. Seen from above, though, on thousands of marchers, their wave of color created a powerful image. It was, somewhat unexpectedly, one of the largest mass demonstrations in American history. Millions of protesters  —   estimates range from three to five million  —   took to the streets of Washington, Los Angeles, New York, Palm Beach, Fla. Boise, Idaho, even Fargo, N. D. Sister demonstrations were held in Thailand, in Malawi, in Antarctica. The energy of almost every group alarmed or incensed by Trump’s election seemed to have poured into a single demonstration. That it happened on the day after his inauguration was not surprising. What was striking was that all these people had come together under the auspices of a march for women. Just two months earlier, the left did not appear to be a unified front. The polls had barely closed before the infighting began. Some blamed Hillary Clinton for ignoring Wisconsin, or the Democratic National Committee for boxing other candidates out of the primary field. Some blamed identity politics, which made   white voters “feel excluded,” according to Prof. Mark Lilla of Columbia. Others blamed white people, particularly the coastal ones who couldn’t get their heartland relatives on their side. But a crew of   angry women was still aiming its ire at Trump. In the hours after his victory on Nov. 8, Teresa Shook, a retired lawyer in Hawaii, posted to Facebook, suggesting a march on Washington. Some women on the East Coast had the same idea. At first, these suggestions were so impulsive that they seemed almost metaphorical. But within days, tens of thousands of women had pledged to join in. Over the course of two months, the idea became something far bigger than initially imagined. Eventually, an entire organizing team would have permits,   fleets of buses, portable toilets, celebrity sponsors and support from Gloria Steinem. Men meekly asked their female family members and Twitter followers: “Are we allowed to join?” By the middle of January, with the event shaping up to be the   demonstration, the New York magazine writer Jonathan Chait worried that “Women’s March” was too niche an organizing principle  —   it was a “bad name,” he tweeted, a divisive “brand. ” The opposite turned out to be true: Women led the resistance, and everyone followed. A march for women managed to crowd a broad opposition force onto its platform. In the weeks since the march, that energy has only spread. After Trump’s executive order halting travel from seven   countries, the march’s striking proof of concept  —   hit the streets, and a surprising number of others will join you  —   fueled more spontaneous actions in unexpected places: outside courthouses, Trump hotels, airport terminals, the offices of Senator Mitch McConnell. At each protest, you were likely to see a few pink cat ears poking out of the crowd, a reminder of the opposition’s first gathering. It seems unlikely that any other kind of march would have turned out quite this way. In this moment, it happened that “women” was the one tent large enough to contain almost every major strain of protest against Trump. Those who know their feminist history might see a paradox here. The women’s movement has not always been a site for unity. It has been marked just as deeply by its fractures, failures and tensions. But more than a century of internal turmoil has also forced the movement to reckon with its divisions. Now, the question is whether it can bring even more Americans into the fold. Clinton’s loss on Nov. 8 was a pivotal,   moment in the course of the American women’s movement. In an evening, the   first female president was shoved to the side by what a sizable chunk of the nation saw as that classic historical figure: the male chauvinist pig. In parts of the popular imagination, it wasn’t just a loss for Clinton or for the Democratic Party. It was a repudiation of feminism itself. But Clinton has always been a wary avatar of feminism. In 2008, she didn’t run for president as a “women’s candidate” if anything, she campaigned with her sex in the closet and the strategist Mark Penn advising her to harden her image into an American Iron Lady. “They do not want someone who would be the first mama,” he wrote in one memo. Years later, HBO’s “Veep” would satirize that posture through its own fictional politician. “I can’t identify myself as a woman!” she tells her staff. “People can’t know that. Men hate that. And women who hate women hate that, which I believe is most women. ” In the eight years between Clinton’s first and second presidential campaigns, though, something shifted: Feminism became fashionable. By the start of the Obama era, incisive women’s blogs like Jezebel and Feministing had already hit the web and started throwing popcorn at the big screen of American culture, covering the same topics that women’s magazines did  —   fashion, movies, sex  —   but taking on the women’s magazines too. By Obama’s second term, this model had thrived and multiplied so many times over that even a   of the sports website Bleacher Report started his own women’s site, Bustle. Soon enough, no corner of culture was safe from a feminist critique, from Christmas songs to “manspreading. ” Pop stars  —   people like Lady Gaga, Katy Perry and Taylor Swift  —   were asked if they were feminists, and if they shied away from the label, outrage would greet them online. Feminism became increasingly popular, but in a very specific way  —   one attuned to the concerns of people with office jobs and time to spend online. The feminist priorities of this new media landscape tended to involve topics that   women would experience firsthand: reproductive rights, catcalling, campus rape, professional opportunity,   representation. The writers setting its tone tended to be young women who were asked to produce large amounts of clickable copy, for not much money, in very little time, exploring feminist issues not through   reporting but through “takes” on the women already making news: the   balance of Yahoo’s chief executive, Marissa Mayer the pay gap between Jennifer Lawrence and her male  . Some content chased sexist slights down to the most passing personal concerns, like an item from The Huffington Post that sighed: “There is no proper way for a woman to cut her hair, let alone do anything right in this world. ” It’s not that women’s activist groups vanished or political organizing stalled. But it did become possible for an American woman to cultivate a relationship to feminism that was primarily consumerist: There were feminist TV shows to watch, feminist celebrities to follow, feminist clothes to buy. Unlike many other major social movements, women’s liberation dovetails neatly with an important advertising demographic, a lesson capitalism absorbed more than a century ago. In 1908, the advertiser J. Walter Thompson hired suffragists to address the growing women’s market. Over the next decades, the industry would slip women’s rights messaging into ad copy. Old Dutch Cleanser offered “freedom from household drudgery” Shredded Wheat promised a “declaration of independence” from cooking. These days, even our bath products have achieved empowerment. Ads for Secret deodorant nudge us to ask for a raise, and those for Always prompt us to challenge stereotypes about girls. Dove wants us to feel beautiful at any size. It’s telling which strand of feminism these brands have deemed marketable: the one that doubles as  . This is a vision of feminism in which the primary thing that needs to change is a woman’s frame of mind. Something similar happened to the pop stars who once hesitated to call themselves feminists  —   they came around to feminism by redefining feminism around themselves. To Lady Gaga, feminism was about protecting “the integrity of women who are ambitious. ” Taylor Swift realized, she said, that she had “been taking a feminist stance without actually saying so. ” Feminism was being defined down to its most benign interpretation. It was less a political platform than a brand identity. In 2013, “Lean In,” by Sheryl Sandberg, raised this   subtext to the level of text. Sandberg called the book “sort of a feminist manifesto,” but it preached individual solutions to systemic problems, encouraging women to focus on “internal obstacles” and “dismantle the hurdles in ourselves. ” This feminist mode, where personal success becomes synonymous with social progress, can be plugged into any number of political orientations. The latest model for the   feminist brand is Ivanka Trump, who has built a lifestyle company under the hashtag #WomenWhoWork. A recent pitch neatly weds activist language with shoppable solutions: “We’re committed to solving problems. If we can’t find a solution, we’ll make it ourselves (case in point: the Soho Tote, the ultimate work bag). ” By the time the 2016 campaign rolled around, Clinton wasn’t just permitted to run as a feminist  —   she was practically obligated to. Her messaging shifted accordingly. Years of women’s debating the right way to be a feminist had the side effect of forcing the first female   candidate to the left. In 2008, she argued that she wanted abortion to be “safe, legal and rare  —   and by rare I mean rare. ” In last year’s debates, she stopped qualifying her support. “I will defend Planned Parenthood,” she said in one. “I will defend Roe v. Wade, and I will defend women’s rights to make their own health care decisions. ” Meanwhile, her campaign mimicked the aesthetics of the   feminist mode. The candidate affirmed her feminism in a video interview with Lena Dunham, posed in a Kim Kardashian selfie and made a cameo on “Broad City. ” Her campaign posted a   listicle informing Latinos that Clinton was “just like your abuela. ” (With the Twitter hashtag #NotMyAbuela, those voters begged to differ.) Her site sold embroidered pillows that said “A Woman’s Place Is in the White House” and a   with a big “YAAAS, HILLARY!” printed over her senior portrait from high school. After Trump accused her of playing “the woman’s card,” her campaign introduced a free   “Official Hillary for America Woman Card” that drove more than $2 million in donations within days. One young woman earnestly prodded her at an Iowa campaign event: “If you could choose, would you rather be the president or Beyoncé?” Pop feminism, having been washed of its political urgency, was now being integrated back into politics at the highest level. The candidate who once shrank from feminism was positioning herself as an icon of the movement. Her image became closely aligned with two metaphors  —   the pantsuit and the glass ceiling  —   that speak to a particular kind of woman: a corporate careerist at the top of her field. A “secret” Facebook group, Pantsuit Nation, popped up to encourage Clinton supporters to wear pantsuits to the polls. When she clinched the Democratic nomination for president last June  —   the one she would formally accept the following month, dressed in suffragist white  —   Clinton called back to the Seneca Falls convention of 1848, where “a small but determined group of women, and men, came together with the idea that women deserved equal rights. ” The feminist project started there, she implied  —   and she was going to finish it. When Clinton lost, pop feminism suffered a crisis. As everyone pored over exit polls, some of the   fractures between different groups of women exploded into view.   percent of black women voted for Clinton, but 53 percent of white women voted for Trump, perhaps more likely to see themselves in his vision of the world than in the pop feminism that fed Clinton’s campaign. Despite Trump’s palpable, eminently bloggable disrespect for women  —   and that infamous tape  —   he had successfully courted a faction of female voters. His win suggested that Americans were more comfortable with misogyny than many had thought, but it also burst the bubble of cheery pop feminism, which had achieved its huge popularity at the expense of class consciousness and racial solidarity. In some places, you could watch the mood turn in a matter of days. The Pantsuit Nation Facebook group ceased its celebrations and became a site for sharing stories of pain and resilience. But when the group’s founder, a Maine educator named Libby Chamberlain, announced a plan to channel the power of the group in real life, it wasn’t exactly a call to activism  —   it was a   book. “You are a force, Pantsuit Nation,” she wrote. “Let’s see if we can harness that force within the pages of a book and see it on night stands and coffee tables all around the world. ” The idea brought on a revolt. “The N. R. A. with its five million members has a stranglehold on Congress,” one commenter wrote. “Pantsuit Nation has four million members and decides its main mission is ‘storytelling’ and now, selling books. What a colossal waste. ” But for some outside observers, this was a productive comeuppance. Rhon   an associate professor of Africana studies at Williams College in Massachusetts, published “An Open Letter to White Liberal Feminists,” on the website Black Perspectives, expressing her disappointment that it had taken Donald Trump to shake them into her reality. “I am delighted that you have received the potential awakening of a lifetime, and that now you might actually get what so many of us have been describing all along,” she wrote. “Welcome to that deep perpetual angst. Embrace it, and allow it to motivate you to a deeper form of action. ” In those same November weeks, the nascent    project was navigating its own identity crisis. Some of the early organizers had    jobs  —   pastry chef, yoga instructor. One of the women, Bob Bland, a fashion designer, had amassed a small online following by designing “NASTY WOMAN” and “BAD HOMBRE”   and selling them online. “I had this whole network of ‘nasty women’ and ‘bad hombres,’’u2009” she told me. “After the election, they were looking to me like, ‘What are we going to do next? ’’u2009” Disparate organizers convened around a Facebook event announcing a Million Women March. There was one major problem with this: In 1997, activists organized a Million Woman March in Philadelphia to address the particular concerns of black women. When this new march on Washington unwittingly chose a very similar name, it crystallized the idea that the nascent movement was being run by a handful of white women with no organizing history. Comments began pouring in from all sides. The organizers had stumbled into a conflict that has dogged women’s organizing from the very beginning: Of all the tensions that have coursed through the women’s movement, none has ever been quite so pronounced as the one between white and black women. Consider what happened when Sojourner Truth showed up at a women’s rights convention in Ohio in 1851. Frances Gage, the woman running the show, recalled the scene 12 years later: “The leaders of the movement trembled on seeing a tall, gaunt black woman in a gray dress and white turban, surmounted with an uncouth sunbonnet, march deliberately into the church, walk with the air of a queen up the aisle and take her seat upon the pulpit steps. ” A “buzz of disapprobation” spread through the church. White women in attendance complained that a black woman’s testimony would distract from the convention’s focus. “Don’t let her speak, Mrs. Gage  —   it will ruin us,” one said. “Every newspaper in the land will have our cause mixed up with abolition and niggers, and we shall be utterly denounced. ” Throughout the convention, men arrived to speak out against women’s suffrage. Women, they said, were too weak and helpless to be trusted with the power of the vote. Because “there were very few women in those days who dared to ‘speak in meeting,’’u2009” as Gage put it, their points went unchallenged until Truth stepped forward. White women hissed, but Truth’s very identity nullified the arguments coming from both men and women in attendance. “That man over there says that women need to be helped into carriages, and lifted over ditches, and to have the best place everywhere,” she said. “Nobody ever helps me into carriages, or over mud puddles, or gives me any best place. And ain’t I a woman? Look at me! Look at my arm!” She rolled up her sleeve to the shoulder. “I have plowed and planted, and gathered into barns, and no man could head me. And ain’t I a woman?” In that moment, Truth shattered an idea of white femininity that had been used to both underpin and undermine the cause of suffrage. As a slave, she had worked in the fields like a man as a free black woman, she could not rely on the offerings of white male gentility. Gage wrote that Truth’s testimony compelled the white women in attendance to embrace her “with streaming eyes, and hearts beating with gratitude. ” But two years later, Truth still drew jeers from white crowds when she attended women’s meetings. A vision of whiteness was ingrained in the leaders and the arguments of the mainstream movement. Even the suffragists’ signature white clothes were deliberately chosen to signal purity. This ideal of feminine virtue did not extend to black women, or   ones. Some suffragists made their racism and classism explicit. In 1894, a white woman at a meeting of the Brooklyn Woman Suffrage Association complained that New York had become an “asylum for the trash of all nations,” arguing that women’s suffrage ought to be restricted. “Think what it means to give it to all women,” she said. “Our criminal and pauper men have wives there are thousands of female operatives in tobacco factories and similar fields of labor there are probably two million Negro women in this country who are but little uplifted above the plane of animals. ” One curious point of this history is that so many suffragists came from the antislavery movement. Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony, whose partnership would come to define the suffrage movement in the United States, started their activist careers as abolitionists. But after the Civil War, as black men and all women agitated for the right to vote, a political battle broke out over who would be enfranchised first. (Either way, black women would be last.) In 1865, Stanton lamented having to “stand aside to see ‘Sambo’ walk into the kingdom first,” as she put it in The National   Standard. Over time, these racial contours would harden into lasting institutions. When women’s social clubs spread across the United States at the turn of the century, two models emerged.   clubs leveraged   women’s leisure time to campaign for social reforms. Black women, who largely worked outside the home, came together around urgent needs. One of the first actions of the black Chicago Women’s Club was to raise money to prosecute a police officer who killed a black man. The main distinction between clubs, the black activist Fannie Barrier Williams wrote, was that for black women, “it is not a fad. ” Black women distinguished themselves not only as suffragists but also as vocal critics of a movement that pushed one kind of justice aside in pursuit of another. In 1913, when thousands of suffragists marched on Washington to agitate for the vote, black women were instructed to march in the back. Ida B. Wells defied the order and marched with the delegation from Illinois, her home state. She wasn’t just protesting for her right to vote. She was protesting the protest too. This dynamic is not only a thing of distant history: In the thick of feminism’s second wave, women were often still divided along lines of identity. In 1967, as the   author Betty Friedan called the first meeting of the New York chapter of the National Organization for Women, she found herself at odds with a black activist and lawyer named Flo Kennedy, who pushed the women around her to make common cause with the antiwar and Black Power movements. Friedan and the meeting’s host  —   Muriel Fox, the   female executive at the world’s largest   agency  —   were not pleased. As Kennedy put it in her memoirs, they “went bonkers. ” Friedan’s 1963 book, “The Feminine Mystique,” had been an awakening for a class of white, married,   women, and she pictured herself as the leader of what she called a “mainstream” feminist movement. When women at one 1970 march offered her a lavender armband to wear in solidarity with a NOW member recently attacked for her bisexuality, Friedan dropped it on the ground, furious at the attempt to add gay rights to her program. Kennedy continually pushed in the opposite direction, trying to build bridges between feminist groups and other movements. At one point, Friedan admonished her to leave the feminist movement alone and “focus her attention on matters of Black Power. ” As the second wave matured, black women found themselves continually calling on it to consider a new approach, one that acknowledged the different needs of different women. As the black feminist and leftist Barbara Smith told the National Women’s Studies Association in 1979, any feminism that didn’t account for the specific concerns of black women, poor women, disabled women, lesbians and others was not really feminism  —   it was “merely female  . ” There has never been one women’s movement. It’s difficult, for example, to say that the American feminist project started in Seneca Falls, N. Y. in 1848, because black women were not invited to that convention. It’s hard to say that electing a woman as president would have been feminism’s crowning achievement, because the success of one woman does not naturally trickle down to all. The history of the women’s movement is one of warring factions and sharp  . But its 150 years of navigating internal disputes put it in a position to lead what seemed, at the end of last fall, like a highly divided left. “It’s embarrassing to me now to say it, but I didn’t know the term ‘intersectionality’ when we started,” Bob Bland, the Women’s March   told me. Now she deployed it often to emphasize the growing diversity of the march. She told various reporters that she had met women working “in so many different intersectionalities” and hoped to reach a “a wide intersectionality of people” in a march that reflected “all of the different intersections of human rights. ” That magic word comes from a 1989 paper by the legal scholar Kimberlé Crenshaw that was published in The University of Chicago Legal Forum. Crenshaw had studied cases in which black women sued their employers for what appeared to be “compound discrimination”  —   both racial and gender biases. But they were often told they lacked legal standing: Laws protected them from discrimination as   or as women, but not specifically as black women. Crenshaw used a traffic metaphor to describe the interlocking forms of oppression a person might face. Cars flowed through an intersection in all directions when an accident happened, it could be caused by cars from any number of sides, or even all sides. That metaphor would be plucked from Crenshaw’s paper and grow in resonance over the next two decades, until “intersectionality” became a rallying cry  —   the main point of rhetorical resistance against the tide of   feminist conversation. Even beneath the shiny surface of   pop feminism, dissenters took countless shots at its racial cluelessness, its lack of   its sometimes shallow concerns. Women of color convened on Twitter under hashtags like #SolidarityIsForWhiteWomen to detail their experiences of being sidelined in feminist conversations, and many on the left criticized the way a     feminism was becoming popular just as income inequality between women was ballooning. (It’s hard to “lean in” to a job cleaning hotel rooms.) In recent years, intersectionality even popped up in People. com, on Bustle and in a tweet from Clinton. Often the criticism that lies behind this word is brushed off, met with defensiveness, taken personally. (As the founder of Pantsuit Nation wrote to critics of her book deal: “This is not the place for divisiveness. ”) Women turn to feminism because they want to stand up and say something it can be jarring for them be told to sit down and listen to someone else. But the concept became a useful tool for the march on Washington, which set about the task of uniting feminism’s mainstream, popular arm and its dissenting factions  —   all in the space of two months. Soon after the suggestion to march raced across the web, Vanessa Wruble  —   a white producer and   of the media company OkayAfrica  —   made a pivotal intervention in its planning. “I thought the stakes were so high,” she told me. “It needed to be an inclusive movement, or it was going to be a total disaster. I felt that it could damage the country. ” At this critical moment, with the march quickly ballooning into something bigger than the initial organizers could handle on their own, Wruble reached out and urged them to drop the name Million Women March. Then she linked them up with her network, and soon three seasoned activists  —   Carmen Perez, Linda Sarsour and Tamika Mallory  —   got on board. These women hadn’t necessarily supported Clinton, and they didn’t necessarily identify as feminists. But they had experience organizing in communities of color and saw the march as an opportunity to reach a large new audience. When Sarsour got the call, she had just posted a comment on the march’s Facebook page: “Can you include Muslim women and Muslim communities in the list?” The three women  —   one Chicana Latina, one   one black  —   met through their involvement in Justice League NYC, a   initiative. In 2015, they organized a   march from New York to Washington, ending in a rally at the Capitol that drew a small crowd. Now hundreds of thousands of women whose previous interest in justice may have been abstract at best were turning to them for leadership. The question, Perez told me, was “How do we get them to understand that their liberation is bound with ours?” Meanwhile, the three had some catching up to do with the mainstream feminist perspective. “I don’t have a lot of what I would consider to be deep, transformative relationships with white women,” Sarsour told me. “I’ve been learning a lot,” she said, and working toward becoming “more comfortable around this movement of feminism that I always felt didn’t particularly include Muslim women. ” The organizers appeared on the   radio morning show “The Breakfast Club” and loaded their Instagram page with black feminist heroes. But they also posed for windswept photos in Vogue, and some dropped by the Wing, a private Manhattan women’s club with a $2, 250 annual membership fee. Their rally put Angela Davis on the same stage as Scarlett Johansson. When I called Kimberlé Crenshaw in January, she had just returned home to Los Angeles from the march on Washington, where she walked with a group of women from the African American Policy Forum. Her group was so far back in the crowd that they couldn’t hear the rally, and “I’m kind of glad about it,” she told me. “We were in this sea of humanity. ” Wading through the crowd, she said, “I saw all the different issues and people that had found their way under the banner of the Women’s March. It was the embodiment of the intersectional sensibilities that a lot of us have been working on for a very long time. ” The women’s movement’s tendency toward a singular perspective is “not an exceptional problem for feminism,” Crenshaw told me. “Patriarchy works in such a way that these critiques never even surface in a lot of movements led by men. This conversation isn’t always happening in other spaces. And if the conversation leads to more robust ways of thinking about women, feminism and social justice, it can be a very good thing. ” “The   question is: Can these feminisms live together under an   banner?” Crenshaw said. “It happened for 24 hours all across the world. ” When I made my way back to my hotel after the march, the cheers of the crowd fading into the distance, I opened my laptop and saw a different version of what I had just seen in person. Now it was all filtered through my own   bubble  —   that of a   white woman who lives in Brooklyn. Facebook’s trending topics, tailored to fulfill each user’s particular online habits, served me up a   version of the day’s events. It pointed me toward the speeches of Scarlett Johansson and Madonna, and nobody else. As scenes of the march traveled through the media and across the web, the story spun out in even more directions. Twitter lit up with notes of internal dissent and snapshots of signs from the march: DON’T FORGET: WHITE WOMEN VOTED FOR TRUMP and BLACK WOMEN TRIED TO SAVE Y’ALL and I’LL SEE YOU NICE WHITE LADIES AT THE NEXT #BLACKLIVESMATTER MARCH, RIGHT? But for the moment, at least, Trump appears to be the great uniter. In the days and weeks since the march, its energy spilled into spontaneous actions across the country, with protesters coming together on behalf of Muslims and immigrants. Donations poured into Planned Parenthood and the American Civil Liberties Union. Congressional switchboards were inundated with calls. When The Washington Post polled Americans   it registered a huge shift in energy among Democrats, especially Democratic women, 40 percent of whom said they planned to get more involved in activism. But liberals are not the only ones drawing inspiration from the protests. Flip to Fox News, click around conservative blogs or browse   Twitter, and you can watch the demonstrations fuel a different kind of opposition narrative. After the march, Fox News set clips of rally speeches to foreboding music. Breitbart published photos with the headline “See what a massive, Hillary shaped bullet America just dodged?” The   Media Research Center aggregated the most “vile and ridiculous signs. ” Twitter exploded with   attacks on Linda Sarsour, who was called a “terrorist” who “loves ISIS. ” When the annual March for Life hit the Mall to demonstrate against abortion rights, The Blaze called it “the real women’s march. ” (The Women’s March did, at one point, remove the name of an   group from its list of partners, after an uproar.) According to Public Policy Polling, 48 percent of Trump voters think the protesters who convened at airports to protest the travel ban were paid by George Soros. Trump tweeted recently: “Professional anarchists, thugs and paid protesters are proving the point of the millions of people who voted to MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!” In the first weeks of the Trump administration, the factions that split over his election are deepening along the same lines. Each side seems oddly confident in its political position. Trump supporters call themselves “the silent majority,” while his critics identify as the “popular vote. ” When I called Eleanor Smeal, a   of the Feminist Majority Foundation, and asked her whether the organization had any plans to reach out to the 53 percent of white women who voted for Trump, her response was to question the margin of error in the polls. “We don’t really know if we lost the majority or not, and I believe that we did not,” she told me. “I think they’re with us. ” For now, the factions of the left seem to have found an accord. But to regain any power in Washington, they will need to sway the center too  —   including some of those women who voted for Trump. The white women of the left, many of whom are just now finding their footing as activists, have been eager to dissociate from that group. Mention the 53 percent, and they’re quick to tell you that they’re of the 47. But of all the people who marched on Washington last month, they may be among the best positioned to reach across that aisle. “I know of no other time when it would be more important,” Barbara Smith, the black feminist and leftist, told me. “That’s not my work to do, but somebody ought to do it. ”



############################################################

